---
tag: kasuto, austin-springer, hylian-language-institute, documentation, archive, dictionary
orthography: kasuto, roman
language: english, kasuto-hylian
author: kasuto-of-kataan, austin-springer
---
**[Table of Contents](00-toc.md)** | **[Dictionary Index](10.0-daksunare.md)** | **[Previous Page: Dictionary (N - S)](10.4-daksunare-n-s.md)**

# <span class="hylian_kas">taz daksunare hilana == S = U</span><br>The Hylian Dictionary -- Sh-Ü


> [!NOTE] Archival Dictionary
> This Dictionary page is part of an archive, and should not be used as a reference for the current wordlist of the language. While the words located here are almost certainly still valid, a far more thorough lexicon, and dictionary, can be found outside of the archives!

## SH <span class="hylian_kas">= S</span>

+ **<span class="hylian_kas">Sa</span> sha** (shah): _super-imperative adjunct._ This gives the verb a meaning of necessity. It tells what someone must do. _[See verb section.](04-wirtën.md)_
+ **<span class="hylian_kas">S@</span> sha•i** (shy): _subjunctive adjunct._ This gives the verb a subjunctive meaning. It is equivalent to the English might or may, as in I might go home. _[See verb section.](04-wirtën.md)_
+ **<span class="hylian_kas">Se</span> she** (shay): _imperative adjunct._ This gives the verb an imperative meaning, that is less forceful than the super-imperative adjunct. It is equivalent to the English use of should or ought to. _[See verb section.](04-wirtën.md)_
+ **<span class="hylian_kas">Sekana</span> shekana** (shay-**KAH'**-nah): _adj._ Sheikah, Sheikan. This word describes someone or something of Sheikah origin.
+ **<span class="hylian_kas">Sekane</span> shekane** (shay-**KAH'**-nay): _n._ Sheikah. A member of the Sheikah race.
+ **<span class="hylian_kas">SEmse</span> shëmse** (shay-**KAH'**-nay): _n._ Sun. This word is the name used for the Sun. It refers only to the sun of their planet, not to a general star.
+ **<span class="hylian_kas">Si</span> shi** (shee): _progressive adjunct._ This gives the verb a progressive meaning. It is equivalent to the English use of the verb to be + the present participle of a verb, e.g. I am reading. _[See verb section.](04-wirtën.md)_
+ **<span class="hylian_kas">Sije</span> shije** (**SHEE'**-jay): _n._ Boobs, breasts. A vulgar slang term for a woman's breasts. Usually used in the plural.
+ **<span class="hylian_kas">Siu</span> shiu** (**SHEE'**-ooh): _passive adjunct._ This gives the verb a passive meaning. It gives the subject of a sentence the meaning of having the action performed upon it, e.g. The book was read as opposed to I read the book. _[See verb section.](04-wirtën.md)_
+ **<span class="hylian_kas">SInte</span> shïnte** (**SHINN'**-tay): _n._ Name of the twenty-sixth letter of the Hylian alphabet.
+ **<span class="hylian_kas">So</span> sho** (show): _imperfect adjunct._ This gives the verb an imperfect meaning. It is equivalent to the English use of used to. It tells about something that occurred in the past, but occurred at no specific time. _[See verb section.](04-wirtën.md)_
+ **<span class="hylian_kas">SO</span> sho•i** (shoy): _conditional adjunct._ This gives the verb a conditional meaning. It is equivalent to the English would, as in I would buy this if I had enough money. _[See verb section.](04-wirtën.md)_
+ **<span class="hylian_kas">Su</span> shu** (shoo): _conditional ability adjunct._ This tells the the subject is able to do something, but there is some doubt behind it. It is equivalent to the English use of the word could, as in I could go if I wanted to.  _[See verb section.](04-wirtën.md)_
+ **<span class="hylian_kas">Sh;linO</span> shúlino•i** (**SHOO'**-lee-noy): _suffix._ Mrs. Ms., miss. This word is attached to a person's family name, and is equivalent to using "Mrs.", "Miss", or "Ms."
+ **<span class="hylian_kas">ShulO</span> shulo•i** (**SHOO'**-loy): _suffix._ Mister. This word is attached to a person's family name, and is equivalent to using "mister". 

## T <span class="hylian_kas">= t</span>

+ **<span class="hylian_kas">taro</span> taro** (**TAR'**-oh): _conj._ So, so that, in order to. Synonymous with lo.
+ **<span class="hylian_kas">taz</span> taz** (tahz): _def article._ The. Definite article, used the same way as English "the". Does not change with gender or plurality. _Taz hilane ~ The Hylian_; _Taz hilanën ~ The Hylians._
+ **<span class="hylian_kas">t@rag</span> ta•irag** (**TIE'**-rahg): _vl._ To be. Used in much the same way as the English "be". Used to express a state of being or as a linking verb. This is its unconjugated form.
+ **<span class="hylian_kas">tEnSag</span> tënshag** (**TEN'**-shahg): _n._ To have, to possess.
+ **<span class="hylian_kas">tInske</span> tïnske** (**TIN'**-skay): _n._ Task, work.
+ **<span class="hylian_kas">toere</span> toere** (toe-**AIR'**-ay): _n._ World.
+ **<span class="hylian_kas">toka</span> toka** (**TOE'**-kah): _adj._ All, all of.
+ **<span class="hylian_kas">tonye</span> tonye** (**TONE'**-yay): _n._ Pussy, cunt. An extremely vulgar slang term for vagina.
+ **<span class="hylian_kas">torimag</span> torimag** (tore-**EE'**-mahg): _v._ To end, to finish, to compete.
+ **<span class="hylian_kas">t$te</span> to•ate** (**TAW'**-tay): _n._ Name of the twenty-third letter of the Hylian alphabet.
+ **<span class="hylian_kas">trodEme</span> trodëme** (troe-**DEMM'**-ay): _n._ Thirty.
+ **<span class="hylian_kas">troe</span> troe** (**TROW'**-ay): _n._ Three.
+ **<span class="hylian_kas">trofaSe</span> trofashe** (troe-**FAHSH'**-ay): _n._ Triforce.
+ **<span class="hylian_kas">trosale</span> trosale** (trow-**SAHL'**-ay): _n._ Three hundred.

## TH <span class="hylian_kas">= T</span>

+ **<span class="hylian_kas">Tate</span> thate** (**THAH'**-tay): _n._ Name of the twenty-seventh letter of the Hylian alphabet.

## U <span class="hylian_kas">= u</span>

+ **<span class="hylian_kas">uniag</span> uniag** (ooh-**NEE'**-ahg): _vt._ To unite, to join.
+ **<span class="hylian_kas">uSikag</span> ushikag** (ooh-**SHE'**-kahg): _v._ To conquer.
+ **<span class="hylian_kas">uSikage</span> ushikage** (**ooh''**-she-**KAHG'**-ay): _n._ Conquest.
+ **<span class="hylian_kas">ute</span> ute** (**OOH'**-tay): _n._ Name of the twenty-ninth letter of the Hylian alphabet.

## Ü <span class="hylian_kas">= U</span>

+ **<span class="hylian_kas">Unte</span> ünte** (**UNN'**-tay): _n._ Name of the thirtieth letter of the Hylian alphabet

**[Next Page: Dictionary (V - Z)](10.6-daksunare-v-z.md)**
