New Gaea/lexicon/a_d.md, before:

## A

=aki	-aki	<o'ki:>	suffix	lover	This is attached to a person's name to indicate love for a person. Used between spouses and boyfriends and girlfriends.
akime	akime	<o ki:'mei>	n.	Friend.
aktaJ&	aktajhá	<ok" toZo'>	expletive intj.	To hell, damn it.	Vulgar term equivalent to "Damn it to hell."
akte	akte	<ok'tei>	n.		Name of the first letter of the Hylian alphabet.
alba	alba	<oL'bo>	adj.	Holy.
amkanag	amkanag	<om ko'nog>	vt.	To love.
amkane	amkane	<om ko'nei>	n.	Love.
anye	anye	<on'yei>	n.	Year.
anz	anz	<onz>	contraction.	The, to the.	Contraction of the words ank and taz.
=aSi	-ashi	<o'shi:>	suffix.	dear, darling	Attached to a person's name to indicate affection. It is used by parents to children, between siblings, or between family members of the same social level (like cousins).
=aSO	-asho•i	<o'shoi>	suffix.		Attached to a person's name to indicate affection. It is used to show both love and respect. It is used for social superiors like parents and grandparents.
ati	ati	<o'ti:>	intj.	Darn.	Used as a non-vulgar expletive.
az	az	<oz>	contraction.	The, to the.	Contraction of the words _ab_ and _taz_.

## Ä -A

Akte	äkte	(ACK-tay)	n.		Name of the second letter of the Hylian alphabet.
Aktriu	äktriu	(ack-TREE-ooh)	pron.	Others.

## A•I - ã

@te	a•ite	(EYE-tay)	n.		Name of the third letter of the Hylian alphabet.

## A•U -%
%te	a•ute	(OW-tay)	n.		Name of the fourth letter of the Hylian alphabet.

## B -b
bado	bado	(BAY-tay)	prep.	After.
bEnkati	bënkati	(benn-KAH-tee)	intj.	Welcome.	Usually used as a greeting or salutation.	Bënkati ak taz vïlae da•ia katane	Welcome to the village of Kataan.
bete	bete	(BAY-tay)	n.		Name of the fifth letter of the Hylian alphabet.
biankag	biankag	(bee-AHN-kahg)	vi.	To look.	To use one's eyes to view something, or to imagine something.	Bagu biankis ant taz ka•iane	I looked at the dog.
biankag	biankag	(bee-AHN-kahg)	vt.	To seek, to look for (something).	This form of the verb takes a direct object. It is used in the sense of looking for something, or seeking something.	Bagu biankas ab taz veuarde	I seek (look for) the truth.
brinste	brinste	(BREEN-stay)	n.	Arm.

## D -d
dan>	danó•í	(dah-NOY)	intj.	You're welcome	Used in response to someone saying "aroti" or "thank you".			ED: aroti not included in "a"
danre	danre	(DAHN-ray)	n.	Money, currency.
daonkve	daonkve	(dah-OHNK-vay)	n.	Lake.	This is derived from the words da•ia meaning of and onkve meaning water.
darasune	darasune	(DAHR-ri)	n.	Star.	Used to refer to a star in the sky other than the Sun.
dari	dari	(DAHR-ri)	expletive intj.	Damn, dammit.	Mildly vulgar.
darSe	darshe	(DAHR-shay)	n.	Ass, butt.	Mildly vulgar slang term for buttocks.
date	date	(DAH-tay)	n.		Name of the sixth letter of the Hylian alphabet.
daz	daz	(DAHZ)	contraction.	Of the.	Contraction of the words da•ia and taz.
d@a	da•ia	(DIE-ah)	prep.	Of.	Used to show possession or the origin of something. Used the same way as English "of".	Taz vïlae da•ia katane	The village of Kataan.
dege	dege	(DAY-gay)	n.	God, deity.	This word can refer to any higher power or god, and is not specifically masculine or feminine.
d)gile	dégile	(DAY-gee-lay)	n masc.	God.	This  refers specifically to a male deity or god.
d)gine	dégine	(DAY-gee-nay)	n fem.	Goddess.	This  refers specifically to a female deity or goddess.

depoto	depoto	(day-POE-toe)	prep.	Before.	Tells when an action happened, usually within a prepositional phrase.	It happened before you arrived	Ru panses depoto ta•iu yovtes.
depotok	depotok	(day-POE-toke)	adv.	Before, previously.	Tells when an action happened, it modifies a verb. It has happened before	Ru pansad depotok.
dEme	dëme	(DEMM-ay)	n.	Ten.
didEme	didëme	(dee-DEMM-ay)	n.	Twenty.
diebe	diebe	(dee-AY-bay)	n.	Thief.
disale	disale	(dee-SAHL-ay)	n.	Two hundred.
dise	dise	(DEE-say)	n.	Two.
dokwag	dokwag	(DOE-kwahg)	expletive v.	To fuck
dukw&	dukwá	(dooh-KWAH)	expletive intj.	Fuck.	Extremely vulgar expression to indicate anger or dissatisfaction.

Commit message:

Start of Restructure
Starting to restructure the directory tree for HLS usage

New Gaea/lexicon/a_d.md, after:

## A

| Hylian | Romanized | Pronunciation | Word Type | Gloss | Usage Notes |
|:-------|:----------|:--------------|:----------|:------|:------------|
| <span class="hylian_kas">=aki</span> | -aki | (o'ki:) | suffix | lover | This is attached to a person's name to indicate love for a person. Used between spouses and boyfriends and girlfriends. |
| <span class="hylian_kas">akime</span> | akime | (o ki:'mei) |n. | Friend. | |

+ <span class="hylian_kas">=aki</span>	-aki	(o'ki:)	suffix	lover	This is attached to a person's name to indicate love for a person. Used between spouses and boyfriends and girlfriends.
+ <span class="hylian_kas">akime</span>	akime	(o ki:'mei)	n.	Friend.
+ <span class="hylian_kas">aktaJ&</span>	aktajhá	(ok" toZo')	expletive intj.	To hell, damn it.	Vulgar term equivalent to "Damn it to hell."
+ <span class="hylian_kas">akte</span>	akte	(ok'tei)	n.		Name of the first letter of the Hylian alphabet.
+ <span class="hylian_kas">alba</span>	alba	(oL'bo)	adj.	Holy.
+ <span class="hylian_kas">amkanag</span>	amkanag	(om ko'nog)	vt.	To love.
+ <span class="hylian_kas">amkane</span>	amkane	(om ko'nei)	n.	Love.
+ <span class="hylian_kas">anye</span>	anye	<on'yei>	n.	Year.
+ <span class="hylian_kas">anz</span>	anz	(onz)	contraction.	The, to the.	Contraction of the words _ank_ and _taz_.
+ <span class="hylian_kas">=aSi</span>	-ashi	(o'shi:)	suffix.	dear, darling	Attached to a person's name to indicate affection. It is used by parents to children, between siblings, or between family members of the same social level (like cousins).
+ <span class="hylian_kas">=aSO</span>	-asho•i	(o'shoi)	suffix.		Attached to a person's name to indicate affection. It is used to show both love and respect. It is used for social superiors like parents and grandparents.
+ <span class="hylian_kas">ati</span>	ati	(o'ti:)	intj.	Darn.	Used as a non-vulgar expletive.
+ <span class="hylian_kas">az</span>	az	(oz)	contraction.	The, to the.	Contraction of the words _ab_ and _taz_.

## Ä -A

Akte	äkte	(ACK-tay)	n.		Name of the second letter of the Hylian alphabet.
Aktriu	äktriu	(ack-TREE-ooh)	pron.	Others.

## A•I - ã

@te	a•ite	(EYE-tay)	n.		Name of the third letter of the Hylian alphabet.

## A•U -%
%te	a•ute	(OW-tay)	n.		Name of the fourth letter of the Hylian alphabet.

## B -b
bado	bado	(BAY-tay)	prep.	After.
bEnkati	bënkati	(benn-KAH-tee)	intj.	Welcome.	Usually used as a greeting or salutation.	Bënkati ak taz vïlae da•ia katane	Welcome to the village of Kataan.
bete	bete	(BAY-tay)	n.		Name of the fifth letter of the Hylian alphabet.
biankag	biankag	(bee-AHN-kahg)	vi.	To look.	To use one's eyes to view something, or to imagine something.	Bagu biankis ant taz ka•iane	I looked at the dog.
biankag	biankag	(bee-AHN-kahg)	vt.	To seek, to look for (something).	This form of the verb takes a direct object. It is used in the sense of looking for something, or seeking something.	Bagu biankas ab taz veuarde	I seek (look for) the truth.
brinste	brinste	(BREEN-stay)	n.	Arm.

## D -d
dan>	danó•í	(dah-NOY)	intj.	You're welcome	Used in response to someone saying "aroti" or "thank you".			ED: aroti not included in "a"
danre	danre	(DAHN-ray)	n.	Money, currency.
daonkve	daonkve	(dah-OHNK-vay)	n.	Lake.	This is derived from the words da•ia meaning of and onkve meaning water.
darasune	darasune	(DAHR-ri)	n.	Star.	Used to refer to a star in the sky other than the Sun.
dari	dari	(DAHR-ri)	expletive intj.	Damn, dammit.	Mildly vulgar.
darSe	darshe	(DAHR-shay)	n.	Ass, butt.	Mildly vulgar slang term for buttocks.
date	date	(DAH-tay)	n.		Name of the sixth letter of the Hylian alphabet.
daz	daz	(DAHZ)	contraction.	Of the.	Contraction of the words da•ia and taz.
d@a	da•ia	(DIE-ah)	prep.	Of.	Used to show possession or the origin of something. Used the same way as English "of".	Taz vïlae da•ia katane	The village of Kataan.
dege	dege	(DAY-gay)	n.	God, deity.	This word can refer to any higher power or god, and is not specifically masculine or feminine.
d)gile	dégile	(DAY-gee-lay)	n masc.	God.	This  refers specifically to a male deity or god.
d)gine	dégine	(DAY-gee-nay)	n fem.	Goddess.	This  refers specifically to a female deity or goddess.

depoto	depoto	(day-POE-toe)	prep.	Before.	Tells when an action happened, usually within a prepositional phrase.	It happened before you arrived	Ru panses depoto ta•iu yovtes.
depotok	depotok	(day-POE-toke)	adv.	Before, previously.	Tells when an action happened, it modifies a verb. It has happened before	Ru pansad depotok.
dEme	dëme	(DEMM-ay)	n.	Ten.
didEme	didëme	(dee-DEMM-ay)	n.	Twenty.
diebe	diebe	(dee-AY-bay)	n.	Thief.
disale	disale	(dee-SAHL-ay)	n.	Two hundred.
dise	dise	(DEE-say)	n.	Two.
dokwag	dokwag	(DOE-kwahg)	expletive v.	To fuck
dukw&	dukwá	(dooh-KWAH)	expletive intj.	Fuck.	Extremely vulgar expression to indicate anger or dissatisfaction.
