# Word of the Day #1 - Lintag (Hylian)

Welcome to the first Word of the Day feature for New Gaea Conlangs. Today, we're going to look at a word from Kasuto of Kataan's "Hylian" language:

> **lintag** \[lin: tag\] (verb)
>
> 1. to learn, to study

This word seems very basic, but it gives us a great introduction to Hylian grammatical structures, and allows us to explore the culture of Hyrule as Kasuto envisions it.

First off, **lintag** is a verb, and the infinitive form, which is Kasuto's preferred dictionary form. Like all infinitive verbs in Hylian, it ends with the suffix **-ag**. This means the root or stem of **lintag** is **lint\***, which allows us to look at related words. Before related words, though, let's look at the verbal paradigm of **lint\***:

Hylian verbs conjugate only for time and mood, with 6 standard forms, and two special moods.

- **Special Moods**
  - **Infinitive** (-ag) _lintag_ \[lin: tag\] - to learn, to study
  - **Imperative** (-ans) _lintans_ \[lin: tans\] - learn, study (command)
- **Simple Tense**
  - **Past** (-es) _lintes_ \[lin: tes\] - learned, studied
  - **Present** (-as) _lintas_ \[lin: tas\] - learn(ing), study(ing)
  - **Future** (-os) _lintos_ \[lin: tɔs\] - will learn, will study
- **Perfect + Tense**
  - **Past Perfect** (-ent) _lintent_ \[lin: tent\] - had learned, had studied
  - **Present Perfect** (-ant) _lintant_ \[lin: tant\] - have learned, have studied
  - **Future Perfect** (-ont) _lintont_ \[lin: tɔnt\] - will have learned, will have studied

With this list in mind, the following sentence uses two conjugated verbs:

> _**Lintans** ab jhatag hilane_. \[lin: tans ab ʒa: tag hi la: ne\] =\> (You) Learn (how) to speak Hylian.

This uses the Imperative mood to make **lint\*** into a command meaning "learn how," then specifies the thing to learn is "to speak Hylian." This is an official sample sentence from Kasuto, so any errors in it are canonically allowed.

The Hylian language inflects words for their part of speech. In simple terms, nouns end with **-e**, adjectives end with **-a**, and verbs end with **-ag**. So if we change the ending of **lintag** we can make two new words: **linte** \[lin: te\] (noun) and **linta** \[lin: ta\] (adjective). What do they mean?

Well, Kasuto never gave us canonical meanings, but what would be a noun, or a thing connected to learning? Maybe _knowledge_ or _studies_ or _class_ would be a fitting translation of **linte**. And what might be an adjective? It could be _knowledgeable_, _learned_, _studied_, _well read_, something along those lines.

So let's try making our own sentences with **lint\***:

> _Kasuto tairas **linta** hite_. \[ka su: to tai: ras lin: ta hi: te\] => Kasuto is a knowledgeable person.

This uses our adjective to describe someone as learned or intelligent.

> _Austin'su **linte** **lintant** espanye_. \[aus: tin su lin: te lin: tant es span: je\] => Austin's class has learned Spanish.

This one uses our noun to define a class and the present perfect to communicate a now-completed activity.

Please come back on Monday for the first Adinjo Word of the Day. For joining me in this first Word of the Day post, however, I say:

Aroti,

- Austin Springer
