archival/kasuto_hli/03-aktaie.md, before:

---
tag: kasuto, austin-springer, hylian-language-institute, documentation, archive, alphabet
orthography: kasuto, roman
language: english, kasuto-hylian
author: kasuto-of-kataan, austin-springer
---
**[Table of Contents](archival/kasuto_hli/00-toc)** | **[Previous Chapter: Introduction to the Hylian Language](archival/kasuto_hli/02-bënkati)**

# <span class="hylian_kas">taz aktãe hilana</span><br>The Hylian Alphabet

**The Hylian Alphabet**

| Hylian Letter | Transliteration | Name | Pronunciation |
|:-:|:-:|:-:|:-|
| <span class="hylian_kas">a</span> | a | akte (AHK-tay) | Like the a in "father". |
| <span class="hylian_kas">á</span> | á | akte asënta (AHK-tay ah-SENN-tah) | Accented version of the above letter, used in words that do not follow the normal stress pattern. This is not considered a separate letter, it is a different form of _akte._ |
| <span class="hylian_kas">ä</span> | ä | äkte (ACK-tay) | Like the a in "hat". |
| <span class="hylian_kas">à</span> | à | äkte (ACK-tay ah-SENN-tah) | Accented version of the above letter, used in words that do not follow the normal stress pattern. This is not considered a separate letter, it is a different form of _äkte._ |
| <span class="hylian_kas">ã</span> | a·i | a·ite (EYE-tay) | Like the word "I". This is a diphthong that is a combination of _akte_ and _ite._ It is pronounced as a single sound. |
| <span class="hylian_kas">Ã</span> | á·í | a·ite asënta (EYE-tay ah-SENN-tah) | Accented version of the above letter, used in words that do not follow the normal stress pattern. This is not considered a separate letter, it is a different form of _a·ite._ |
| <span class="hylian_kas">â</span> | a·u | a·ute (OW-tay) | Like the ow in "how". This is a diphthong that is a combination of _akte_ and _ute._ It is pronounced as a single sound. |
| <span class="hylian_kas">Â</span> | á·ú | a·ute asënta (OW-tay ah-SENN-tah) | Accented version of the above letter, used in words that do not follow the normal stress pattern. This is not considered a seperate letter, it is a different form of _a·ute._ |
| <span class="hylian_kas">b</span> | b | bete (BAY-tay) | Pronounced the same as English b. |
| <span class="hylian_kas">d</span> | d | date (DAH-tay) | Pronounced the same as English d. |
| <span class="hylian_kas">e</span> | e | ete (EY-tay) | Like the a in "hate". |
| <span class="hylian_kas">é</span> | é | ete asënta (EY-tay ah-SENN-tah) | Accented version of the above letter, used in words that do not follow the normal stress pattern. This is not considered a seperate letter, it is a different form of _ete._ |
| <span class="hylian_kas">ë</span> | ë | ënte (ENN-tay) | Like the e in "get". |
| <span class="hylian_kas">è</span> | è | ënte asënta (ENN-tay ah-SENN-tah) | Accented version of the above letter, used in words that do not follow the normal stress pattern. This is not considered a seperate letter, it is a different form of _ënte._ |
| <span class="hylian_kas">f</span> | f | fete (FAY-tay) | Pronounced the same as English f. |
| <span class="hylian_kas">g</span> | g | gante (GONN-tay) | Pronounced like an English hard g, as in "give". |
| <span class="hylian_kas">h</span> | h | hënte (HEN-tay) | Pronounced the same as English h. |
| <span class="hylian_kas">i</span> | i | ite (EE-tay) | Like the ee in "see". |
| <span class="hylian_kas">í</span> | í | ite asënta (EE-tay ah-SENN-tah) | Accented version of the above letter, used in words that do not follow the normal stress pattern. This is not considered a seperate letter, it is a different form of _ite._ |
| <span class="hylian_kas">ï</span> | ï | ïnte (INN-tay) | Like the i in "give". |
| <span class="hylian_kas">ì</span> | ì | ïnte asënta (INN-tay ah-SENN-tah) | Accented version of the above letter, used in words that do not follow the normal stress pattern. This is not considered a seperate letter, it is a different form of _ïnte._ |
| <span class="hylian_kas">î</span> | i·u | i·ute (YOU-tay) | Like the word "you". This is a diphthong that is a combonation of _ite_ and _ute._ It is pronounced as a single sound. |
| <span class="hylian_kas">Î</span> | í·ú | i·ute asënta (YOU-tay ah-SENN-tah) | Accented version of the above letter, used in words that do not follow the normal stress pattern. This is not considered a seperate letter, it is a different form of _i.ute._ |
| <span class="hylian_kas">j</span> | j | jate (JAH-tay) | Pronounced the same as English j or soft g. |
| <span class="hylian_kas">J</span> | jh | jhete (ZHAY-tay) | Like the s in "measure", or j in French "Jacques". |
| <span class="hylian_kas">k</span> | k | kate (KAH-tay) | Pronounced the same as English k. |
| <span class="hylian_kas">l</span> | l | lete (LAY-tay) | Pronounced the same as English l. |
| <span class="hylian_kas">m</span> | m | mate (MAH-tay) | Pronounced the same as English m. |
| <span class="hylian_kas">n</span> | n | note (NO-tay) | Pronounced the same as English n. |
| <span class="hylian_kas">o</span> | o | ote (OH-tay) |  Like the o in "home". |
| <span class="hylian_kas">\\</span> | ó | ote asënta (OH-tay ah-SENN-tah) | Accented version of the above letter, used in words that do not follow the normal stress pattern. This is not considered a seperate letter, it is a different form of _ote._ |
| <span class="hylian_kas">O</span> | o·a | to·ate (TAW-tay) | Like the aw in "law". This is a diphthong that is a combonation of _ote_ and _akte._ It is pronounced as a single sound. | 
| <span class="hylian_kas">{</span> | ó·á | to·ate asënta (TAW-tay ah-SENN-tah) | Accented version of the above letter, used in words that do not follow the normal stress pattern. This is not considered a seperate letter, it is a different form of _to.ate._ |
| <span class="hylian_kas">p</span> | p | pate (PAH-tay) | Pronounced the same as English p. |
| <span class="hylian_kas">r</span> | r | rote (ROW-tay) | Pronounced the same as English r. |
| <span class="hylian_kas">s</span> | s | sate (SAH-tay) | Pronounced the same as English s. It is always pronounced like the s in "sit". It never sounds like the s in "dogs". |
| <span class="hylian_kas">S</span> | sh | shïnte (SHIN-tay) | Pronounced the same as English sh. |
| <span class="hylian_kas">t</span> | t | tote (TOE-tay) | Pronounced the same as English t. |
| <span class="hylian_kas">T</span> | th | thate (THAH-tay) | Pronounced like the th in English "thin". It is never pronounced like the th "the". |
| <span class="hylian_kas">u</span> | u | ute (OOH-tay) | Like the oo in "food". |
| <span class="hylian_kas">ú</span> | ú | ute asënta (OOH-tay ah-SENN-tah) | Accented version of the above letter, used in words that do not follow the normal stress pattern. This is not considered a seperate letter, it is a different form of _ute._ |
| <span class="hylian_kas">ü</span> | ü | ünte  | (UN-tay) Like the u "fun". |
| <span class="hylian_kas">ù</span> | ù | ùnte asënta (UN-tay ah-SENN-tah) | Accented version of the above letter, used in words that do not follow the normal stress pattern. This is not considered a seperate letter, it is a different form of _ünte._ |
| <span class="hylian_kas">v</span> | v | vete (VAY-tay) | Pronounced the same as English v. |
| <span class="hylian_kas">w</span> | w | wante (WONN-tay) | Pronounced the same as English w. |
| <span class="hylian_kas">y</span> | y | yote (YOE-tay) | Pronounced the same as English y. It is always used as a consonant as in "yes", never as a vowel as in "my". |
| <span class="hylian_kas">z</span> | z | zante (ZAHN-tay) | Pronounced the same as English z. |

## Word Stress

One of the most important rules to know in order to speak properly is the proper stressing of syllables in a word. Some languages, such as Japanese place very little emphasis on syllable stress. Other languages, such as ones in the Indo-European family (which includes English), have very specific rules for which syllables to stress in a word. English happens to have very irregular stress patterns in its words, mainly because of the vast influences from foreign languages. Fortunately, Hylian has very regular stress patterns.

1. All words have their primary stress on the second to last syllable, unless there is a written accent mark. If there is an accent mark, then the marked syllable receives the primary stress.

2. All words have secondary stresses on the fourth to last syllable, unless there is a written accent mark. If there is an accent mark, then the secondary stress falls on every other syllable before the accent mark.<br>For example, the word "hiparáduse" has an irregular stress pattern because it has an accent mark. The stress pattern for this word is /hi" par a' du se/. The third syllable /a'/ is stressed. The secondary stress is on /hi"/, which is the first syllable.

3. All syllables that do not receive a primary or secondary stress are unstressed. And all syllables after an accent mark are also unstressed.

4. When there is an apostrophe, the stress rules for the original word do not change. The original word is stressed as if it had no extra ending added to it. All the syllables after the apostrophe are always unstressed.

Below is a chart illustrating the stress rules.

The main stress is bold and indicated by an apostrophe ('), secondary stresses are indicatied by a double quote ("), unstressed syllables have no markings

| Hylian Text | Word | Stress Pattern |
|:-:|:-:|:-|
| <span class="hylian_kas">dege</span> | dege | de' ge |
| <span class="hylian_kas">veuarde</span> | veuarde | ve" u ar' de |
| <span class="hylian_kas">hipar&amp;duse</span> | hiparáduse | hi" par a' du se |
| <span class="hylian_kas">faeuire</span> | faeuire |  fa e" u **ir'** e |

Words with apostrophes retain the stress of the original word, the letters after the apostrophe are unstressed.

| Hylian Text | Word | Stress Pattern |
|:-:|:-:|:-|
| <span class="hylian_kas">kasuto'sa</span> | Kasuto'sa | ka **su'** to sa |

**[Next Chapter: Hylian Verbs](archival/kasuto_hli/04-wirtën)**

Commit message:

review(kasuto_hli): Review of Kasuto.net complete
Applied styles throughout kasuto_hli archive pages
added images relevant to kasuto_hli archive
Moved misplaced information about the alphabet from 02-bënkati to 03-aktaie
updated kanban board
SUBMITTING kasuto_hli work for PR to main

archival/kasuto_hli/03-aktaie.md, after:

---
tag: kasuto, austin-springer, hylian-language-institute, documentation, archive, alphabet
orthography: kasuto, roman
language: english, kasuto-hylian
author: kasuto-of-kataan, austin-springer
---
**[Table of Contents](archival/kasuto_hli/00-toc)** | **[Previous Chapter: Introduction to the Hylian Language](archival/kasuto_hli/02-bënkati)**

# <span class="hylian_kas">taz aktãe hilana</span><br>The Hylian Alphabet

## Table of Contents

+ [[#Hylian _Aktaie_ Basics]]
+ [[#The Hylian Alphabet]]
+ [[#Word Stress]]

## Hylian _Aktaie_ Basics

The Hylian alphabet is phonetic in nature, i.e. each symbol represents a distinct sound. This is similar to the English alphabet, but is much more definite. Each Hylian letter represents only one and only one sound. The letters themselves are very simple block letters. Notice that the shapes consist only of right angles and straight lines, which makes the letters very simple to write and easy to discern.

The most important aspect of the language is transliteration of the words from the Hylian alphabet to the Roman alphabet. Transliteration is spelling the words from a foreign alphabet into another alphabet. Translation is telling what the word means in another language. Don't confuse _transliteration_ with _translation._

A fact that makes the Hylian language easy to learn is that the letters are read from left to right and top to bottom. In other words, Hylian is read the same way English is. Many alphabets, such as the Roman alphabet which we use, has capital and lowercase letters. Hylian however, has only one set of letters. There are no capital or lowercase letters, all are in the same case.

## The Hylian Alphabet

| Hylian Letter | Transliteration | Name | Pronunciation |
|:-:|:-:|:-:|:-|
| <span class="hylian_kas">a</span> | a | akte (AHK-tay) | Like the a in "father". |
| <span class="hylian_kas">á</span> | á | akte asënta (AHK-tay ah-SENN-tah) | Accented version of the above letter, used in words that do not follow the normal stress pattern. This is not considered a separate letter, it is a different form of _akte._ |
| <span class="hylian_kas">ä</span> | ä | äkte (ACK-tay) | Like the a in "hat". |
| <span class="hylian_kas">à</span> | à | äkte (ACK-tay ah-SENN-tah) | Accented version of the above letter, used in words that do not follow the normal stress pattern. This is not considered a separate letter, it is a different form of _äkte._ |
| <span class="hylian_kas">ã</span> | a·i | a·ite (EYE-tay) | Like the word "I". This is a diphthong that is a combination of _akte_ and _ite._ It is pronounced as a single sound. |
| <span class="hylian_kas">Ã</span> | á·í | a·ite asënta (EYE-tay ah-SENN-tah) | Accented version of the above letter, used in words that do not follow the normal stress pattern. This is not considered a separate letter, it is a different form of _a·ite._ |
| <span class="hylian_kas">â</span> | a·u | a·ute (OW-tay) | Like the ow in "how". This is a diphthong that is a combination of _akte_ and _ute._ It is pronounced as a single sound. |
| <span class="hylian_kas">Â</span> | á·ú | a·ute asënta (OW-tay ah-SENN-tah) | Accented version of the above letter, used in words that do not follow the normal stress pattern. This is not considered a seperate letter, it is a different form of _a·ute._ |
| <span class="hylian_kas">b</span> | b | bete (BAY-tay) | Pronounced the same as English b. |
| <span class="hylian_kas">d</span> | d | date (DAH-tay) | Pronounced the same as English d. |
| <span class="hylian_kas">e</span> | e | ete (EY-tay) | Like the a in "hate". |
| <span class="hylian_kas">é</span> | é | ete asënta (EY-tay ah-SENN-tah) | Accented version of the above letter, used in words that do not follow the normal stress pattern. This is not considered a seperate letter, it is a different form of _ete._ |
| <span class="hylian_kas">ë</span> | ë | ënte (ENN-tay) | Like the e in "get". |
| <span class="hylian_kas">è</span> | è | ënte asënta (ENN-tay ah-SENN-tah) | Accented version of the above letter, used in words that do not follow the normal stress pattern. This is not considered a seperate letter, it is a different form of _ënte._ |
| <span class="hylian_kas">f</span> | f | fete (FAY-tay) | Pronounced the same as English f. |
| <span class="hylian_kas">g</span> | g | gante (GONN-tay) | Pronounced like an English hard g, as in "give". |
| <span class="hylian_kas">h</span> | h | hënte (HEN-tay) | Pronounced the same as English h. |
| <span class="hylian_kas">i</span> | i | ite (EE-tay) | Like the ee in "see". |
| <span class="hylian_kas">í</span> | í | ite asënta (EE-tay ah-SENN-tah) | Accented version of the above letter, used in words that do not follow the normal stress pattern. This is not considered a seperate letter, it is a different form of _ite._ |
| <span class="hylian_kas">ï</span> | ï | ïnte (INN-tay) | Like the i in "give". |
| <span class="hylian_kas">ì</span> | ì | ïnte asënta (INN-tay ah-SENN-tah) | Accented version of the above letter, used in words that do not follow the normal stress pattern. This is not considered a seperate letter, it is a different form of _ïnte._ |
| <span class="hylian_kas">î</span> | i·u | i·ute (YOU-tay) | Like the word "you". This is a diphthong that is a combonation of _ite_ and _ute._ It is pronounced as a single sound. |
| <span class="hylian_kas">Î</span> | í·ú | i·ute asënta (YOU-tay ah-SENN-tah) | Accented version of the above letter, used in words that do not follow the normal stress pattern. This is not considered a seperate letter, it is a different form of _i.ute._ |
| <span class="hylian_kas">j</span> | j | jate (JAH-tay) | Pronounced the same as English j or soft g. |
| <span class="hylian_kas">J</span> | jh | jhete (ZHAY-tay) | Like the s in "measure", or j in French "Jacques". |
| <span class="hylian_kas">k</span> | k | kate (KAH-tay) | Pronounced the same as English k. |
| <span class="hylian_kas">l</span> | l | lete (LAY-tay) | Pronounced the same as English l. |
| <span class="hylian_kas">m</span> | m | mate (MAH-tay) | Pronounced the same as English m. |
| <span class="hylian_kas">n</span> | n | note (NO-tay) | Pronounced the same as English n. |
| <span class="hylian_kas">o</span> | o | ote (OH-tay) |  Like the o in "home". |
| <span class="hylian_kas">\\</span> | ó | ote asënta (OH-tay ah-SENN-tah) | Accented version of the above letter, used in words that do not follow the normal stress pattern. This is not considered a seperate letter, it is a different form of _ote._ |
| <span class="hylian_kas">O</span> | o·a | to·ate (TAW-tay) | Like the aw in "law". This is a diphthong that is a combonation of _ote_ and _akte._ It is pronounced as a single sound. | 
| <span class="hylian_kas">{</span> | ó·á | to·ate asënta (TAW-tay ah-SENN-tah) | Accented version of the above letter, used in words that do not follow the normal stress pattern. This is not considered a seperate letter, it is a different form of _to.ate._ |
| <span class="hylian_kas">p</span> | p | pate (PAH-tay) | Pronounced the same as English p. |
| <span class="hylian_kas">r</span> | r | rote (ROW-tay) | Pronounced the same as English r. |
| <span class="hylian_kas">s</span> | s | sate (SAH-tay) | Pronounced the same as English s. It is always pronounced like the s in "sit". It never sounds like the s in "dogs". |
| <span class="hylian_kas">S</span> | sh | shïnte (SHIN-tay) | Pronounced the same as English sh. |
| <span class="hylian_kas">t</span> | t | tote (TOE-tay) | Pronounced the same as English t. |
| <span class="hylian_kas">T</span> | th | thate (THAH-tay) | Pronounced like the th in English "thin". It is never pronounced like the th "the". |
| <span class="hylian_kas">u</span> | u | ute (OOH-tay) | Like the oo in "food". |
| <span class="hylian_kas">ú</span> | ú | ute asënta (OOH-tay ah-SENN-tah) | Accented version of the above letter, used in words that do not follow the normal stress pattern. This is not considered a seperate letter, it is a different form of _ute._ |
| <span class="hylian_kas">ü</span> | ü | ünte  | (UN-tay) Like the u "fun". |
| <span class="hylian_kas">ù</span> | ù | ùnte asënta (UN-tay ah-SENN-tah) | Accented version of the above letter, used in words that do not follow the normal stress pattern. This is not considered a seperate letter, it is a different form of _ünte._ |
| <span class="hylian_kas">v</span> | v | vete (VAY-tay) | Pronounced the same as English v. |
| <span class="hylian_kas">w</span> | w | wante (WONN-tay) | Pronounced the same as English w. |
| <span class="hylian_kas">y</span> | y | yote (YOE-tay) | Pronounced the same as English y. It is always used as a consonant as in "yes", never as a vowel as in "my". |
| <span class="hylian_kas">z</span> | z | zante (ZAHN-tay) | Pronounced the same as English z. |

## Word Stress

One of the most important rules to know in order to speak properly is the proper stressing of syllables in a word. Some languages, such as Japanese place very little emphasis on syllable stress. Other languages, such as ones in the Indo-European family (which includes English), have very specific rules for which syllables to stress in a word. English happens to have very irregular stress patterns in its words, mainly because of the vast influences from foreign languages. Fortunately, Hylian has very regular stress patterns.

1. All words have their primary stress on the second to last syllable, unless there is a written accent mark. If there is an accent mark, then the marked syllable receives the primary stress.

2. All words have secondary stresses on the fourth to last syllable, unless there is a written accent mark. If there is an accent mark, then the secondary stress falls on every other syllable before the accent mark.<br>For example, the word "hiparáduse" has an irregular stress pattern because it has an accent mark. The stress pattern for this word is /hi" par a' du se/. The third syllable /a'/ is stressed. The secondary stress is on /hi"/, which is the first syllable.

3. All syllables that do not receive a primary or secondary stress are unstressed. And all syllables after an accent mark are also unstressed.

4. When there is an apostrophe, the stress rules for the original word do not change. The original word is stressed as if it had no extra ending added to it. All the syllables after the apostrophe are always unstressed.

Below is a chart illustrating the stress rules.

The main stress is bold and indicated by an apostrophe ('), secondary stresses are indicatied by a double quote ("), unstressed syllables have no markings

| Hylian Text | Word | Stress Pattern |
|:-:|:-:|:-|
| <span class="hylian_kas">dege</span> | dege | de' ge |
| <span class="hylian_kas">veuarde</span> | veuarde | ve" u ar' de |
| <span class="hylian_kas">hipar&amp;duse</span> | hiparáduse | hi" par a' du se |
| <span class="hylian_kas">faeuire</span> | faeuire |  fa e" u **ir'** e |

Words with apostrophes retain the stress of the original word, the letters after the apostrophe are unstressed.

| Hylian Text | Word | Stress Pattern |
|:-:|:-:|:-|
| <span class="hylian_kas">kasuto'sa</span> | Kasuto'sa | ka **su'** to sa |

**[Next Chapter: Hylian Verbs](archival/kasuto_hli/04-wirtën)**
