archival/kasuto_hli/10.1-daksunare-a-d.md, before:

---
tag: kasuto, austin-springer, hylian-language-institute, documentation, archive, dicitonary
orthography: kasuto, roman
language: english, kasuto-hylian
author: kasuto-of-kataan, austin-springer
---
**[Table of Contents](archival/kasuto_hli/00-toc)** | **[Dictionary Index](archival/kasuto_hli/10-daksunare)**

# <span class="hylian_kas">taz daksunare hilana == a = d</span><br>The Hylian Dictionary -- A-D

## A <span class="hylian_kas">= a</span>

<aside>Jerin: For some reason, the first set of lines here originally used angle brackets (&lt; &gt;) to indicate the pronunciation guide, but the rest of the page uses parentheses. For consistency, I'm converting this section to use parentheses as well.<br>It also seems to use a slightly different phonetic key? I'm not going to change that for this file.</aside>


+ <span class="hylian_kas">=aki</span> **-aki** (**o'** ki:): _suffix._ This is attached to a person's name to indicate love for a person. Used between spouses and boyfriends and girlfriends.
+ <span class="hylian_kas">akime</span> **akime** (o **ki:'** me): _n._ Friend.
+ <span class="hylian_kas">aktaJ&amp;</span> **aktajhá** (ok'' to **Zo'**): _expletive intj._ To hell, damn it. Vulgar term equivalent to "Damn it to hell."
+ <span class="hylian_kas">akte</span> **akte** (**ok'** tei): _n._ Name of the first letter of the Hylian alphabet.
+ <span class="hylian_kas">alba</span> **alba** (**oL'** bo): _adj._ Holy.
+ <span class="hylian_kas">amkanag</span> **amkanag** (om **ko'** nog): _vt._ To love.
+ <span class="hylian_kas">amkane</span> **amkane** (om **ko'** nei): _part of speech._ Love
+ <span class="hylian_kas">anye</span> **anye** (**on'** yei): _n._ Year.
+ <span class="hylian_kas">anz</span> **anz** (onz): _contraction._ The, to the. Contraction of the words _ank_ and _taz._
+ <span class="hylian_kas">=aSi</span> **-ashi** (**o'** shi:): _suffix._ Attached to a person's name to indicate affection. It is used by parents to children, between siblings, or between family members of the same social level (like cousins).
+ <span class="hylian_kas">=aSo</span> **-asho.i** (**o'** shoi): _suffix._ Attached to a person's name to indicate affection. It is used to show both love and respect. It is used for social superiors like parents and grandparents.
+ <span class="hylian_kas">ati</span> **ati** (**o'** ti:): _intj._ Darn. Used as a non-vulgar expletive.
+ <span class="hylian_kas">az</span> **az** (oz): _contraction._ The, to the. Contraction of the words ab and taz.

## Ä <span class="hylian_kas">= A</span>

+ <span class="hylian_kas">Akte</span> **äkte** (**ACK'**-tay): _n._ Name of the second letter of the Hylian alphabet.
+ <span class="hylian_kas">Aktriu</span> **äktriu** (ack-**TREE**-ooh): _pron._ Others.

## A.I <span class="hylian_kas">= @</span>

+ <span class="hylian_kas">@te</span> **a.ite** (**EYE**-tay): _n._ Name of the third letter of the Hylian alphabet.

## A.U <span class="hylian_kas">= %</span>

+ <span class="hylian_kas">%te</span> **a.ute** (**OW'**-tay): _n._ Name of the fourth letter of the Hylian alphabet.

## B <span class="hylian_kas">= b</span>

+ <span class="hylian_kas">bado</span> **bado** (**BAH'**-doe): _prep._ After.
+ <span class="hylian_kas">bEnkati</span> **bënkati** (benn-**KAH'**-tee): _intj._ Welcome. Usually used as a greeting or salutation. _Bënkati ak taz vïlae da.ia katane ~ Welcome to the village of Kataan._
+ <span class="hylian_kas">bete</span> **bete** (**BAY'**-tay): _n._ Name of the fifth letter of the Hylian alphabet.
+ <span class="hylian_kas">biankag</span> **biankag** (bee-**AHN'**-kahg):
	1. _vi._ To look. To use one's eyes to view something, or to imagine something. _Bagu biankis ant taz ka?iane ~ I looked at the dog._
	2. _vt._ To seek, to look for (something). This form of the verb takes a direct object. It is used in the sense of looking for something, or seeking something. _Bagu biankas ab taz veuarde ~ I seek (look for) the truth._
+ <span class="hylian_kas">brinste</span> **brinste** (**BREEN'**-stay): _n._ Arm.

## D <span class="hylian_kas">= d</span>

+ <span class="hylian_kas">dan&gt;</span> **danó.í** (dah-**NOY'**): _intj._ You're welcome. Used in response to someone saying "_aroti_" or "thank you".
+ <span class="hylian_kas">danre</span> **danre** (**DAHN'**-ray): _n._ Money, currency.
+ <span class="hylian_kas">daonkve</span> **daonkve** (dah-**OHNK'**-vay): _n._ Lake. This is derived from the words _da.ia_ meaning _of_ and _onkve_ meaning _water._
+ <span class="hylian_kas">darasune</span> **darasune** (dahr''-rah-**SOO'**-nay): _n._ Star. Used to refer to a star in the sky other than the Sun.
+ <span class="hylian_kas">dari</span> **dari** (**DAHR'**-ri:): _expletive intj._ Damn, dammit. Mildly vulgar.
+ <span class="hylian_kas">darSe</span> **darshe** (**DAHR'**-shay): _n._ Ass, butt. Mildly vulgar slang term for buttocks.
+ <span class="hylian_kas">date</span> **date** (**DAH'**-tay): _n._ Name of the sixth letter of the Hylian alphabet.
+ <span class="hylian_kas">daz</span> **daz** (**DAHZ'**): _contraction._ Of the. Contraction of the words da.ia and taz.
+ <span class="hylian_kas">d@a</span> **da.ia** (**DIE'**-ah): _preposition._ Of. Used to show possession or the origin of something. Used the same way as English "of". _Taz vïlae da.ia katane ~ The village of Kataan._
+ <span class="hylian_kas">dege</span> **dege** (**wi:r'** te): _n._ God, deity. This word can refer to any higher power or god, and is not specifically masculine or feminine.
+ <span class="hylian_kas">d)gile</span> **dégile** (**DAY'**-gee-lay): _n masc._ God. This  refers specifically to a male deity or god.
+ <span class="hylian_kas">d)gine</span> **dégine** (**DAY'**-gee-nay): _n fem._ Goddess. This  refers specifically to a female deity or goddess.
+ <span class="hylian_kas">depoto</span> **depoto** (day-**POE'**-toe): _prep._ Before. Tells when an action happened, usually within a prepositional phrase. _Ru panses depoto ta.iu yovtes ~ It happened before you arrived._
+ <span class="hylian_kas">depotok</span> **depotok** (day-**POE'**-toke): _adv._ Before, previously. Tells when an action happened, it modifies a verb. _Ru pansad depotok ~ It has happened before._
+ <span class="hylian_kas">dEme</span> **dëme** (**DEMM'**-ay): _n._ Ten.
+ <span class="hylian_kas">didEme</span> **didëme** (dee-**DEMM'**-ay): _n._ Twenty.
+ <span class="hylian_kas">diebe</span> **diebe** (dee-**AY'**-bay): _n._ Thief.
+ <span class="hylian_kas">disale</span> **disale** (dee-**SAHL'**-ay): _n._ Two hundred.
+ <span class="hylian_kas">dise</span> **dise** (**DEE'**-say): _n._ Two.
+ <span class="hylian_kas">dokwag</span> **dokwag** (**DOE'**-kwahg): _expletive v._ To fuck
+ <span class="hylian_kas">duk&amp;</span> **dukwá** (dooh-**KWAH'**): _expletive intj._ Fuck. Extremely vulgar expression to indicate anger or dissatisfaction. 

**[Next Page: Dictionary (E - Ï)](archival/kasuto_hli/10.2-daksunare-e-ï)**

Commit message:

style(kasuto_hli): Formatted Dictionary pages
Formatted Dictionary A-D
Formatted Dictionary E-Ï
Updated Kanban with progress on Formatting

archival/kasuto_hli/10.1-daksunare-a-d.md, after:

---
tag: kasuto, austin-springer, hylian-language-institute, documentation, archive, dictionary
orthography: kasuto, roman
language: english, kasuto-hylian
author: kasuto-of-kataan, austin-springer
---
**[Table of Contents](archival/kasuto_hli/00-toc)** | **[Dictionary Index](archival/kasuto_hli/10-daksunare)**

# <span class="hylian_kas">taz daksunare hilana == a = d</span><br>The Hylian Dictionary -- A-D


> [!NOTE] Archival Dictionary
> This Dictionary page is part of an archive, and should not be used as a reference for the current wordlist of the language. While the words located here are almost certainly still valid, a far more thorough lexicon, and dictionary, can be found outside of the archives!

## A <span class="hylian_kas">= a</span>

<aside>Jerin: For some reason, the first set of lines here originally used angle brackets (&lt; &gt;) to indicate the pronunciation guide, but the rest of the page uses parentheses. For consistency, I'm converting this section to use parentheses as well.<br>It also seems to use a slightly different phonetic key? I'm not going to change that for this file.</aside>


+ <span class="hylian_kas">=aki</span> **-aki** (**o'** ki:): _suffix._ This is attached to a person's name to indicate love for a person. Used between spouses and boyfriends and girlfriends.
+ <span class="hylian_kas">akime</span> **akime** (o **ki:'** me): _n._ Friend.
+ <span class="hylian_kas">aktaJ&amp;</span> **aktajhá** (ok'' to **Zo'**): _expletive intj._ To hell, damn it. Vulgar term equivalent to "Damn it to hell."
+ <span class="hylian_kas">akte</span> **akte** (**ok'** tei): _n._ Name of the first letter of the Hylian alphabet.
+ <span class="hylian_kas">alba</span> **alba** (**oL'** bo): _adj._ Holy.
+ <span class="hylian_kas">amkanag</span> **amkanag** (om **ko'** nog): _vt._ To love.
+ <span class="hylian_kas">amkane</span> **amkane** (om **ko'** nei): _part of speech._ Love
+ <span class="hylian_kas">anye</span> **anye** (**on'** yei): _n._ Year.
+ <span class="hylian_kas">anz</span> **anz** (onz): _contraction._ The, to the. Contraction of the words _ank_ and _taz._
+ <span class="hylian_kas">=aSi</span> **-ashi** (**o'** shi:): _suffix._ Attached to a person's name to indicate affection. It is used by parents to children, between siblings, or between family members of the same social level (like cousins).
+ <span class="hylian_kas">=aSo</span> **-asho.i** (**o'** shoi): _suffix._ Attached to a person's name to indicate affection. It is used to show both love and respect. It is used for social superiors like parents and grandparents.
+ <span class="hylian_kas">ati</span> **ati** (**o'** ti:): _intj._ Darn. Used as a non-vulgar expletive.
+ <span class="hylian_kas">az</span> **az** (oz): _contraction._ The, to the. Contraction of the words ab and taz.

## Ä <span class="hylian_kas">= A</span>

+ <span class="hylian_kas">Akte</span> **äkte** (**ACK'**-tay): _n._ Name of the second letter of the Hylian alphabet.
+ <span class="hylian_kas">Aktriu</span> **äktriu** (ack-**TREE**-ooh): _pron._ Others.

## A.I <span class="hylian_kas">= @</span>

+ <span class="hylian_kas">@te</span> **a.ite** (**EYE**-tay): _n._ Name of the third letter of the Hylian alphabet.

## A.U <span class="hylian_kas">= %</span>

+ <span class="hylian_kas">%te</span> **a.ute** (**OW'**-tay): _n._ Name of the fourth letter of the Hylian alphabet.

## B <span class="hylian_kas">= b</span>

+ <span class="hylian_kas">bado</span> **bado** (**BAH'**-doe): _prep._ After.
+ <span class="hylian_kas">bEnkati</span> **bënkati** (benn-**KAH'**-tee): _intj._ Welcome. Usually used as a greeting or salutation. _Bënkati ak taz vïlae da.ia katane ~ Welcome to the village of Kataan._
+ <span class="hylian_kas">bete</span> **bete** (**BAY'**-tay): _n._ Name of the fifth letter of the Hylian alphabet.
+ <span class="hylian_kas">biankag</span> **biankag** (bee-**AHN'**-kahg):
	1. _vi._ To look. To use one's eyes to view something, or to imagine something. _Bagu biankis ant taz ka?iane ~ I looked at the dog._
	2. _vt._ To seek, to look for (something). This form of the verb takes a direct object. It is used in the sense of looking for something, or seeking something. _Bagu biankas ab taz veuarde ~ I seek (look for) the truth._
+ <span class="hylian_kas">brinste</span> **brinste** (**BREEN'**-stay): _n._ Arm.

## D <span class="hylian_kas">= d</span>

+ <span class="hylian_kas">dan&gt;</span> **danó.í** (dah-**NOY'**): _intj._ You're welcome. Used in response to someone saying "_aroti_" or "thank you".
+ <span class="hylian_kas">danre</span> **danre** (**DAHN'**-ray): _n._ Money, currency.
+ <span class="hylian_kas">daonkve</span> **daonkve** (dah-**OHNK'**-vay): _n._ Lake. This is derived from the words _da.ia_ meaning _of_ and _onkve_ meaning _water._
+ <span class="hylian_kas">darasune</span> **darasune** (dahr''-rah-**SOO'**-nay): _n._ Star. Used to refer to a star in the sky other than the Sun.
+ <span class="hylian_kas">dari</span> **dari** (**DAHR'**-ri:): _expletive intj._ Damn, dammit. Mildly vulgar.
+ <span class="hylian_kas">darSe</span> **darshe** (**DAHR'**-shay): _n._ Ass, butt. Mildly vulgar slang term for buttocks.
+ <span class="hylian_kas">date</span> **date** (**DAH'**-tay): _n._ Name of the sixth letter of the Hylian alphabet.
+ <span class="hylian_kas">daz</span> **daz** (**DAHZ'**): _contraction._ Of the. Contraction of the words da.ia and taz.
+ <span class="hylian_kas">d@a</span> **da.ia** (**DIE'**-ah): _preposition._ Of. Used to show possession or the origin of something. Used the same way as English "of". _Taz vïlae da.ia katane ~ The village of Kataan._
+ <span class="hylian_kas">dege</span> **dege** (**wi:r'** te): _n._ God, deity. This word can refer to any higher power or god, and is not specifically masculine or feminine.
+ <span class="hylian_kas">d)gile</span> **dégile** (**DAY'**-gee-lay): _n masc._ God. This  refers specifically to a male deity or god.
+ <span class="hylian_kas">d)gine</span> **dégine** (**DAY'**-gee-nay): _n fem._ Goddess. This  refers specifically to a female deity or goddess.
+ <span class="hylian_kas">depoto</span> **depoto** (day-**POE'**-toe): _prep._ Before. Tells when an action happened, usually within a prepositional phrase. _Ru panses depoto ta.iu yovtes ~ It happened before you arrived._
+ <span class="hylian_kas">depotok</span> **depotok** (day-**POE'**-toke): _adv._ Before, previously. Tells when an action happened, it modifies a verb. _Ru pansad depotok ~ It has happened before._
+ <span class="hylian_kas">dEme</span> **dëme** (**DEMM'**-ay): _n._ Ten.
+ <span class="hylian_kas">didEme</span> **didëme** (dee-**DEMM'**-ay): _n._ Twenty.
+ <span class="hylian_kas">diebe</span> **diebe** (dee-**AY'**-bay): _n._ Thief.
+ <span class="hylian_kas">disale</span> **disale** (dee-**SAHL'**-ay): _n._ Two hundred.
+ <span class="hylian_kas">dise</span> **dise** (**DEE'**-say): _n._ Two.
+ <span class="hylian_kas">dokwag</span> **dokwag** (**DOE'**-kwahg): _expletive v._ To fuck
+ <span class="hylian_kas">duk&amp;</span> **dukwá** (dooh-**KWAH'**): _expletive intj._ Fuck. Extremely vulgar expression to indicate anger or dissatisfaction. 

**[Next Page: Dictionary (E - Ï)](archival/kasuto_hli/10.2-daksunare-e-ï)**
