E -e
ete ete (AY-tay): n. Name of the seventh letter of the Hylian alphabet.

? -E
Ek ?k (ekk): conj. And.

Ent ?nt (ehnt): prep. In, on, at. This word is used to describe when something will happen, e.g. in the morning, on Tuesday, at six o'clock. It is usually found in prepositional phrases.

Ente ?nte (ENN-tay): n. Name of the eighth letter of the Hylian alphabet.

F -f
faeuire faeuire (fah-ay-ooh-EAR-ray): n.Fire.

farore farore (fah-ROR-ray): n. Farore. The goddess of courage.

fete fete (FAY-tay): n. Name of the ninth letter of the Hylian alphabet.

fElzana f?lzana (fell-ZAH-nah): adj. Happy, content.

fElzane f?lzane (fell-ZAH-nay): n. Happiness, contentment.

fire fire (FEAR-ray): n. Wind.

G -g
gante gante (GAHN-tay): n. Name of the tenth letter of the Hylian alphabet.

gorana gorana(gorr-ONN-ah): adj. Goron, goronian. Adjective that describes something of Goron origin.

gorane gorane(gorr-ONN-ay): n. Goron. A member of the Goron race. 

H -H
haruke haruke (KOE-say): n. Arrow.

h@k&sule ha?ik?sule (hi-KAH-soo-lay): n. Castle.

hEndEme h?nd?me (hen-DEMM-ay): n. Sixty.

hEnsale h?nsale (hen-SAHL-ay): n. Six hundred.

hEnte h?nte (HEN-tay): n. Six. Can be the number six, or be the name of the eleventh letter of the Hylian alphabet.

hilana hilana (hee-LAHN-ah): adj. Hylian. Used to describe something of Hylian origin. Taz hilana langve ~ The Hylian language.

hilane hilane (hee-LAHN-ay): n. Hylian. A person who belongs to the Hylian race. Link ta?iras hilane ~ Link is (a) Hylian.

hipar&duse hipar?duse (hee-parr-AH-doo-say): n. Heaven, paradise.

hire hire (HEAR-ay): n. One.

hirule hirule (he-ROO-lay): n. Hyrule. The country where the Legend of Zelda takes place.

hite hite (KOE-say): n. Person. Gender-neutral term for a person.

h[tine h?tine (KOE-say): n fem. Woman, female. Gender-specific term for a woman.

h[tile h?tile (KOE-say): n masc. Man, male. Gender-specific term for a man. 

I -i
ite ite (EE-tay): n. Name of the twelfth letter of the Hylian aplhabet.

itsakupande itsakupande (eet-sah-koo-PAHN-day): n. Encyclopedia.

? -I
Inte ?nte (IN-tay): n. Name of the thirteenth letter of the Hylian alphabet. 
