---
tag: kasuto, austin-springer, hylian-language-institute, documentation, archive, dictionary
orthography: kasuto, roman
language: english, kasuto-hylian
author: kasuto-of-kataan, austin-springer
---
**[Table of Contents](archival/kasuto_hli/00-toc)** | **[Dictionary Index](archival/kasuto_hli/10-daksunare)** | **[Previous Page: Dictionary (E - Ï)](archival/kasuto_hli/10.2-daksunare-e-ï)**

# <span class="hylian_kas">taz daksunare hilana == j = m</span><br>The Hylian Dictionary -- J-M


> [!NOTE] Archival Dictionary
> This Dictionary page is part of an archive, and should not be used as a reference for the current wordlist of the language. While the words located here are almost certainly still valid, a far more thorough lexicon, and dictionary, can be found outside of the archives!

## J <span class="hylian_kas">= j</span>

+ **<span class="hylian_kas">jete</span> jete** (**JAY'**-tay): n. Name of the fifteenth letter of the Hylian alphabet.

## JH <span class="hylian_kas">= J</span>

+ **<span class="hylian_kas">Jete</span> jhete** (**ZHAY'**-tay): _n._ Name of the sixteenth letter of the Hylian alphabet.
+ **<span class="hylian_kas">JErdana</span> jhërdana** (zhair-**DAHN'**-nah): _adj._ Gerudo, Gerudan, Gerudian. Word describing something of Gerudo origin. _Taz diebe jhërdana ~ The Gerudo thief._
+ **<span class="hylian_kas">JErdane</span> jhërdane** (zhair-**DAHN'**-nay): _n._ Gerudo. A person who belongs to the Gerudo race. _Taz jhërdane ta•iras diebe ~ The Gerudo is (a) thief._

## K <span class="hylian_kas">= k</span>

+ **<span class="hylian_kas">kamare</span> kamare** (kah''-meet-**SAH'**-ay): _n._ Moon. Used to refer specifically to Hyrule's moon, not moons of other planets.
+ **<span class="hylian_kas">kamitsae</span> kamitsae** (**kah''**-meet-**SAH'**-ay): _n._ Path. This can be literal or figurative, i.e. He walked on the path, or he went down the path of life.
+ **<span class="hylian_kas">=kani</span> -kani** (**KAH'**-nee): _suffix._  Attached to the name of a person you consider a friend or acquaintance, but you also show them respect. Usually used by young people towards adults they know.
+ **<span class="hylian_kas">=kanO</span> -kano•i** (**KAH'**-noy): _suffix._  Attached to the name of a person you repsect and may not know. Usually used with people you've met for the first time, or with someone you know but highly respect.
+ **<span class="hylian_kas">katabag</span> katabag** (**KOE'**-say): _vi & vt._ To write.
+ **<span class="hylian_kas">katane</span> katane** (kah-**TAHN'**-nay): _n._ Kataan. A village located twenty miles south of Hyrule Castle; the village Kasuto lived in.
+ **<span class="hylian_kas">kate</span> kate** (**KAH'**-tay): _n._ Name of the seventeenth letter of the Hylian alphabet.
+ **<span class="hylian_kas">kaz</span> kaz** (koz): _contraction._ To the. Contraction of the words _ak_ and _taz._
+ **<span class="hylian_kas">k@ane</span> ka•iane** (kie-**AHN'**-ay): _n._ Dog. Gender neutral, can refer to either a female or male dog.
+ **<span class="hylian_kas">kibarag</span> kibarag** (key-**BAR'**-ahg): _v._ To change.
+ **<span class="hylian_kas">kibare</span> kibare** (key-**BAR'**-ay): _n._ Change.
+ **<span class="hylian_kas">kiJag</span> kijhag** (**KEY'**-zhag): _vt._ To conjugate. To give a verb a subject and a tense.
+ **<span class="hylian_kas">kiJage</span> kijhage** (key-**ZHAG'**-ay): _n._ Conjugation. The process of conjugating a verb.
+ **<span class="hylian_kas">k[milO</span> kímilo•i** (**KEY'**-me-loy):  Child, kid, little boy. A word used to address a young child without using their name. It is sometimes used as a sign of affection. Used only with male children.
+ **<span class="hylian_kas">k[minO</span> kímino•i** (**KEY'**-me-noy):  Child, kid, little girl. A word used to address a young child without using their name. It is sometimes used as a sign of affection. Used only with female children.
+ **<span class="hylian_kas">kirag</span> kirag** (**KEY'**-rahg): _n._ To buy, to purchase.
+ **<span class="hylian_kas">kisame</span> kisame** (key-**SAH'**-may): _n._ Bastard, asshole. A vulgar expression used to insult someone. It would be roughly equivalent to calling someone a bastard or an asshole. Used for males.
+ **<span class="hylian_kas">kis&amp;mine</span> kisámine** (key-**SAH'**-mee-nay): _n._ Bitch, asshole. A vulgar expression used to insult someone. It would be roughly equivalent to calling a woman a bitch. Used for females.
+ **<span class="hylian_kas">kiSoke</span> kishoke** (key-**SHO'**-kay): _n._ Sword.
+ **<span class="hylian_kas">konktra</span> konktra** (**KOHNK'**-trah): _adj._ Right, correct.
+ **<span class="hylian_kas">kodEme</span> kodëme** (koe-**DEMM'**-ay): _n._ Forty.
+ **<span class="hylian_kas">kosale</span> kosale** (koe-**SAHL'**-ay): _n._ Four hundred.
+ **<span class="hylian_kas">kose</span> kose** (**KOE'**-say): _n._ Four.
+ **<span class="hylian_kas">kragag</span> kragag** (**KRAH'**-gahg): _v._ To shit. A vulgar slang term for defecation.
+ **<span class="hylian_kas">krage</span> krage** (**KRAH'**-gay): _n._ Shit. A vulgar slang term for feces.
+ **<span class="hylian_kas">kriaSag</span> kriashag** (kree-**AH'**-shahg): _vt._ To create.
+ **<span class="hylian_kas">kriaSase</span> kriashase** (**kree''**-ah-**SHAH'**-say): n. Creator.
+ **<span class="hylian_kas">kuje</span> kuje** (**KOOH'**-jay): _n._ Nads, balls. A vulgar slang term for testicles. Usually used in the plural.
+ **<span class="hylian_kas">=kumi</span> -kumi** (**KOOH'**-mee): suffix.  Attached to the name of a person whom you are close friends with. It is a sign of camaraderie and bonding.
+ **<span class="hylian_kas">kursiye</span> kursiye** (**KOE'**-say): _n._ Chair.
+ **<span class="hylian_kas">kuzO</span> kuzo•i** (**KOOH'**-zoy): Sir. This is a form of address that is used without a person's name, it stands by itself. It is used to refer to a male you do not know, or a male that you respect. Equivalent to using "sir" or "mister".
+ **<span class="hylian_kas">kúzinO</span> kúzino•i** (**KOOH'**-zee-noy): Madam, ma'am. This is a form of address that is used without a person's name, it stands by itself. It is used to refer to a female you do not know, or a female that you respect. Equivalent to using "ma'am", "madam", or "miss". 

## L <span class="hylian_kas">= l</span>

+ **<span class="hylian_kas">langve</span> langve** (**LAHNG'**-vay): _n._ Language.
+ **<span class="hylian_kas">lErdag</span> lërdag** (**LARE'**-dahg): _vt._ To read.
+ **<span class="hylian_kas">lErde</span> lërde** (**LARE'**-day): _n._ Book.
+ **<span class="hylian_kas">lErdiSe</span> lërdishe** (lare-**DEE'**-shay): _n._ Literature.
+ **<span class="hylian_kas">lete</span> lete** (**LAY'**-tay): _n._ Name of the eighteenth letter of the Hylian alphabet.
+ **<span class="hylian_kas">lo</span> lo** (low): _conj._ So, so that, in order to. Used to tell the reason why something is done.

## M <span class="hylian_kas">= m</span>

+ **<span class="hylian_kas">male</span> male** (**MAH'**-lay): _n._ Thousand.
+ **<span class="hylian_kas">masa</span> masa** (**MAH'**-sah): _adj._ Many, a lot. Used to describe the amount of something, or an abundance of idividual units of something.
+ **<span class="hylian_kas">=maSta</span> -mashta** (**MAHSH'**-tah): _suffix._ Sire, your majesty. Attached to the name of a king or queen as an honorific expression. It can also be used on its own to address a monarch.
+ **<span class="hylian_kas">=maji</span> -maji** (**MAH'**-jee): _suffix._ Your highness. Attached to the name of a princess, prince, or other member of the royal peerage as an honorific expression. It can also be used on its own.
+ **<span class="hylian_kas">mate</span> mate** (**MAH'**-tay): _n._ Name of the twentieth letter of the Hylian alphabet.
+ **<span class="hylian_kas">miarag</span> miarag** (mee-**ARE'**-ahg): _vt. & vi._ To look, to see, to view. This is used in the sense of physically seeing something, or viewing something.
+ **<span class="hylian_kas">minaze</span> minaze** (me-**NAH'**-zay): Morning. Please note that when this is used as a greeting, as in good morning, the -e ending changes to -i as in _vina minazi._
+ **<span class="hylian_kas">minazi</span> minazi** (me-**NAH'**-zee): Morning. This word is used when greeting someone or saying hello, as in _vina minazi_ or '"good morning."'
+ **<span class="hylian_kas">minazini</span> minazini** (**me''**-nah-**ZEE'**-nee): Morning. This word is used when greeting someone or saying goodbye, as in _vina minazini_ or good morning.
+ **<span class="hylian_kas">m$strag</span> mo•astrag** (**MAWSS'**-trag): _vt._ To show, to demonstrate. 

**[Next Page: Dictionary (N - S)](archival/kasuto_hli/10.4-daksunare-n-s)**
