N -n
nasuna nasuna (NIE-stray): adj. Dark, darkness.  Adjective form of  "nasune".

nasune nasune (NIE-stray): n. Dark, darkness.

n@stre na?istre (NIE-stray): n. Evening, night. When this word is used to greet someone, as in saying "good evening", the -e ending changes to an -i, vina na?istri.

n@stri na?istri (NIE-stree): Evening. This is only used to greet someone when saying hello, as in vina na?istri or good evening.

n@strini na?istrini (nie-STREE-nee): Night. This is only used to greet someone when saying goodbye, as in vina na?istrini or good night.

niatore niatore (nee-ah-TORE-ay): n. Institute.

nidEme nid?me (nee-DEMM-ay): n. Ninety.

nisale nisale (nee-SAHL-ay): n. Nine hundred.

nive nive (NEE-vay): n. Nine.

nImSe n?mshe (NIMM-shay): n. Number.

note note (NO-tay): n. Name of the twenty-first letter of the Hylian alphabet.


O -o
ondEme ond?me (own-DEMM-ay): n. Eighty.
onsale onsale (own-SAHL-ay): n. Eight hundred.

ont ont (ownt): prep. In, on, at. Used to tell where something will happen, e.g in the house, on the patio, at Kasuto's house. Usually part of a prepositional phrase.

onte onte(OWN-tay): n. Eight.

opJe opjhe (OPE-zhay): n. Eye.

ote ote (OH-tay): n. Name of the twenty-second letter of the Hylian alphabet.


P -p
pandEme pand?me (pahn-DEMM-ay): n. Fifty.
panktag panktag (PAHNK-tahg): vt. Can, to be able to. Describes what someone is physically or mentally capable of doing. I can read ~ Bagu panktas ab l?rdag.

pansag pansag (PAHN-sahg): vi. To happen.

pansale pansale (pahn-SAHL-ay): n. Five hundred.

pante pante (PAHN-tay): n. Five.

pate pate (PAH-tay): n. Name of the twenty-fourth letter of the Hylian alphabet.

piante piante (pee-ON-tay): n. Parent. General term for a parent, does not specifically refer to a mother or a father.

pi&ntile pi?ntile (pee-ON-tee-lay): n. Father.

pi&ntine pi?ntine (pee-ON-tee-nay): n. Mother.

poedre poedre (poe-AY-dray): n. Power. 

R -r
rote rote (ROE-tay): n. Name of the twenty-fifth letter of the Hylian alphabet.
riu riu (REE-ooh)

ru ru (rooh):  neut. pron. It, he/she. This pronoun is used in the same way as "it" is in English. The word can represent something that is neither masculine nor feminine, something whose gender is unclear, an object, or a person whose gender is unknown. Ru is also equivalent to today's usage of he/she.

ruzantaze ruzantaze (rooh-zahn-TAH-zay):  proper n. Ruzantaze.This is the family name of Hyrule's royal family.


S -s
sale sale (SAHL-ay): n. Hundred.
sate sate (SAH-tay): n. Name of the twenty-sixth letter of the Hylian alphabet.

=sEnshi -s?nshi (SENN-she):  suffix. Teacher, master.This is only used when attached to a person's name. It is a sign of respect for a teacher, doctor, professor, or other type of educator.

siafire siafire (see-ah-FEAR-ray): n. Sapphire. A blue precious stone.

sidEme sid?me (see-DEMM-ay): n. Seventy.

sikwala sikwala (see-KWAHL-ah): adj. Silent, quiet.

sikwale sikwale (see-KWAHL-ay): n. Silence, quietness.

sikwalok sikwalok (see-KWAHL-oke): adv. Silently, quietly.

sisale sisale (see-SAHL-ay): n. Seven hundred.

site site (SEE-tay): n. Seven.

sIlrag s?lrag (SILL-rahg): vi. To leave.

sore sore (SORE-ay): n. Zero.
