SH -S
Sa sha (shah): super-imperative adjunct. This gives the verb a meaning of necessity. It tells what someone must do. See verb section.
S@ sha.i (shy): subjunctive adjunct. This gives the verb a subjunctive meaning. It is equivalent to the English might or may, as in I might go home. See verb section.

Se she (shay): imperative adjunct. This gives the verb an imperative meaning, that is less forceful than the super-imperative adjunct. It is equivalent to the English use of should or ought to. See verb section.

Sekana shekana (shay-KAH-nah): adj. Sheikah, Sheikan. This word describes someone or something of Sheikah origin.

Sekane shekane (shay-KAH-nay): n. Sheikah. A member of the Sheikah race.

SEmse sh?mse (shay-KAH-nay): n. Sun. This word is the name used for the Sun. It refers only to the sun of their planet, not to a general star.

Si shi (shee): progressive adjunct. This gives the verb a progressive meaning. It is equivalent to the English use of the verb to be + the present participle of a verb, e.g. I am reading. See verb section.

Sije shije (SHEE-jay): n. Boobs, breasts. A vulgar slang term for a woman's breasts. Usually used in the plural.

Siu shiu (SHEE-ooh): passive adjunct. This gives the verb a passive meaning. It gives the subject of a sentence the meaning of having the action performed upon it, e.g. The book was read as opposed to I read the book. See verb section.

SInte sh?nte (SHINN-tay): n. Name of the twenty-sixth letter of the Hylian alphabet.

So sho (show): imperfect adjunct. This gives the verb an imperfect meaning. It is equivalent to the English use of used to. It tells about something that occurred in the past, but occurred at no specific time. See verb section.

SO sho.i (shoy): conditional adjunct. This gives the verb a conditional meaning. It is equivalent to the English would, as in I would buy this if I had enough money. See verb section.

Su shu (shoo): conditional ability adjunct. This tells the the subject is able to do something, but there is some doubt behind it. It is equivalent to the English use of the word could, as in I could go if I wanted to.  See verb section.

Sh;linO sh?lino.i (SHOO-lee-noy): suffix. Mrs. Ms., miss. This word is attached to a person's family name, and is equivalent to using "Mrs.", "Miss", or "Ms."

ShulO shulo.i (SHOO-loy): suffix. Mister. This word is attached to a person's family name, and is equivalent to using "mister". 

T - t
taro taro (TAR-oh): conj. So, so that, in order to. Synonymous with lo.

taz taz (tahz): def article. The. Definite article, used the same way as English "the". Does not change with gender or plurality. Taz hilane ~ The Hylian; Taz hilan?n ~ The Hylians.

t@rag ta.irag (TIE-rahg): vl. To be. Used in much the same way as the English "be". Used to express a state of being or as a linking verb. This is its unconjugated form.

tEnSag t?nshag (TEN-shahg): n. To have, to possess.

tInske t?nske (TIN-skay): n. Task, work.

toere toere (toe-AIR-ay): n. World.

toka toka (TOE-kah): adj. All, all of.

tonye tonye (TONE-yay): n. Pussy, cunt. An extremely vulgar slang term for vagina.

torimag torimag (tore-EE-mahg): v. To end, to finish, to compete.

t$te to.ate (TAW-tay): n. Name of the twenty-third letter of the Hylian alphabet.

trodEme trod?me (troe-DEMM-ay): n. Thirty.

troe troe (TROW-ay): n. Three.

trofaSe trofashe (troe-FAHSH-ay): n. Triforce.

trosale trosale (trow-SAHL-ay): n. Three hundred.

TH -T
Tate thate (THAH-tay): n. Name of the twenty-seventh letter of the Hylian alphabet.

U -u
uniag uniag (ooh-NEE-ahg): vt. To unite, to join.

uSikag ushikag(ooh-SHE-kahg): v. To conquer.

uSikage ushikage(ooh-she-KAHG-ay): n. Conquest.

ute ute (OOH-tay): n. Name of the twenty-ninth letter of the Hylian alphabet.

? -U
Unte ?nte (UNN-tay): n. Name of the thirtieth letter of the Hylian alphabet
