standards/orthography/jerin-roman.md, before:

---
tag: standards documentation romanization orthography
---
# Jerin's Initial HLS Romanization
---
This is the new romanization scheme used at the start of the HLS. As much as possible, it seeks to remain compatible with the previous romanization schemes, whether **[Kasutan](kasuto-roman)** or **[Springerian](springer-roman),** but recognizes that the ideal system is a single **correct** romanization for each letter, and that all of the text should look like like text: there is no rason to replace a normal letter with a symbol such as @, \#, or \&.

HLS romanization is never, under any circumstance, case-sensitive. Input codes are provided for Windows, U.S. International, and Mac or iOS devices using traditional keyboards.

## Single Letter Romanization
It is idea that every letter than can be represented as a single letter in romanization be represented as such, and that (with the exception of casing) there never be two different ways to romanize a single letter.

| Hylian Letter | Keystrokes | Romanized Form |
|:-:|:-:|:-:|
| akte (a) | a | a |
| akte asënta (á) | Win: ALT+0255 | á |
| äkte (ä) | Win: ALT+0228 | ä |
| äkte asënta (à) | Win: ALT+0224 | à |
| bete (b) | b | b |
| acete (c) | c | c |
| date (d) | d | d |
| ete (e) | e | e |
| ete asënta (é) | Win: ALT+0232 | é |
| ënte (ë) | Win: ALT+0235 | ë |
| ënte asënta (è) | Win: ALT+0232 | è |
| fete (f) | f | f |
| gante (g) | g | g |
| hënte (h) | h | h |
| ite (i) | i | i |
| ite asënta (í) | Win: ALT+0237 | í |
| ïnte (ï) | Win: ALT+0239 | ï |
| ïnte asënta (ì) | Win: ALT+0236 | ì |
| jate (j) | j | j |
| kate (k) | k | k |
| lete (l) | l | l |
| mate (m) | m | m |
| note (n) | n | n |
| ote (o) | o | o |
| **ote asënta (ó)** | ALT+02xx | ó |
| **töte** (ö) | ALT+02xx | ö |
| **töte asënta (ò)** | ALT+02xx | ò |
| pate (p) | p | p |
| rote (r) | r | r |
| sate (s) | s | s |
| tote (t) | t | t |
| ute (u) | u | u |
| ute asënta (ú) | ALT+0250 | ú |
| ünte (ü) | ALT+0252 | ü |
| ünte asënta (ù) | ALT+0249 | ù |
| ûkte (û) | ALT+0251 | û |
| vete (v) | v | v |
| wante (w) | w | w |
| xate (x) | x | x |
| yote (y) | y | y |
| zante (z) | z | z |

## Two Letter Romanizations
Despite our best efforts, we can't represent all of the Hylian letters as single, easily-typed, characters. A few of them simply require two letters. As all of the letters used are also in the table above, their pronunciation will change if paired into one of these combinations:

| Hylian Letter | Keystrokes | Romanized Form |
|:-:|:-:|:-:|
| aite (â) | ai | ai |
| aite asënta (Â) | ALT+0225+i | ái |
| aute (ã) | au | au |
| aute asënta (Ã) | ALT+0225+u | áu |
| chäte (C) | ch | ch |
| dhënte (D) | dh | dh |
| iute (î) | iu | iu |
| iute asënta (Î) | íu | íu |

Commit message:

style: adjusted wording, finished jerin-roman.md

standards/orthography/jerin-roman.md, after:

---
tag: standards documentation romanization orthography
---
# Jerin's Initial HLS Romanization
---
This is the new romanization scheme used at the start of the HLS. As much as possible, it seeks to remain compatible with the previous romanization schemes, whether **[Kasutan](kasuto-roman)** or **[Springerian](springer-roman),** but recognizes that the ideal system is a single **correct** romanization for each letter, and that all of the text should look like like text: there is no rason to replace a normal letter with a symbol such as @, \#, or \&.

HLS romanization is never, under any circumstance, case-sensitive. Input codes are provided for Windows, U.S. International, and Mac or iOS devices using traditional keyboards.

## Single Letter Romanization
It is idea that every letter than can be represented as a single letter in romanization be represented as such, and that (with the exception of casing) there never be two different ways to romanize a single letter.

| Hylian Letter | Keystrokes | Romanized Form |
|:-:|:-:|:-:|
| akte (a) | a | a |
| akte asënta (á) | Win: ALT+0255 | á |
| äkte (ä) | Win: ALT+0228 | ä |
| äkte asënta (à) | Win: ALT+0224 | à |
| bete (b) | b | b |
| acete (c) | c | c |
| date (d) | d | d |
| ete (e) | e | e |
| ete asënta (é) | Win: ALT+0232 | é |
| ënte (ë) | Win: ALT+0235 | ë |
| ënte asënta (è) | Win: ALT+0232 | è |
| fete (f) | f | f |
| gante (g) | g | g |
| hënte (h) | h | h |
| ite (i) | i | i |
| ite asënta (í) | Win: ALT+0237 | í |
| ïnte (ï) | Win: ALT+0239 | ï |
| ïnte asënta (ì) | Win: ALT+0236 | ì |
| jate (j) | j | j |
| kate (k) | k | k |
| lete (l) | l | l |
| mate (m) | m | m |
| note (n) | n | n |
| añate (ñ) | Win: ALT+01xx | ñ |
| ote (o) | o | o |
| **ote asënta (ó)** | ALT+02xx | ó |
| **töte** (ö) | ALT+02xx | ö |
| **töte asënta (ò)** | ALT+02xx | ò |
| pate (p) | p | p |
| rote (r) | r | r |
| sate (s) | s | s |
| tote (t) | t | t |
| ute (u) | u | u |
| ute asënta (ú) | ALT+0250 | ú |
| ünte (ü) | ALT+0252 | ü |
| ünte asënta (ù) | ALT+0249 | ù |
| ûkte (û) | ALT+0251 | û |
| vete (v) | v | v |
| wante (w) | w | w |
| xate (x) | x | x |
| yote (y) | y | y |
| zante (z) | z | z |

## Two Letter Romanizations
Despite our best efforts, we can't represent all of the Hylian letters as single, easily-typed, characters. A few of them simply require two letters. As all of the letters used are also in the table above, their pronunciation will change if paired into one of these combinations.

Also, take note: the HLS discourages the use of the _diphthong connector_ seen in previous romanization schemes, but does not (at this time) have single-character transcriptions for the diphthongs.

| Hylian Letter | Keystrokes | Romanized Form |
|:-:|:-:|:-:|
| aite (â) | ai | ai |
| aite asënta (Â) | ALT+0225+i | ái |
| aute (ã) | au | au |
| aute asënta (Ã) | ALT+0225+u | áu |
| chäte (C) | ch | ch |
| dhënte (D) | dh | dh |
| iute (î) | iu | iu |
| iute asënta (Î) | íu | íu |
| oite | oi | oi |
| oite asënta | ói | ói |
| shïnte | sh | sh |
| thate | th | th |
| zhete | zh | zh |

## Numbers and Symbols
The following mapping is used for numbers and symbols, though this remains unchanged since the original **Kasutan** system.

| Hylian Character | Keystroke | Roman Character |
|:-:|:-:|:-:|
| <span class="hylian_kas">0</span><br>sore | 0 | 0 |
| <span class="hylian_kas">1</span><br>hire | 1 | 1 |
| <span class="hylian_kas">2</span><br>dise | 2 | 2 |
| <span class="hylian_kas">3</span><br>troe | 3 | 3 |
| <span class="hylian_kas">4</span><br>kose | 4 | 4 |
| <span class="hylian_kas">5</span><br>pante | 5 | 5 |
| <span class="hylian_kas">6</span><br>hënte (numeral) | 6 | 6 |
| <span class="hylian_kas">7</span><br>site | 7 | 7 |
| <span class="hylian_kas">8</span><br>onte | 8 | 8 |
| <span class="hylian_kas">9</span><br>nive | 9 | 9 |
| _full stop_ | . | . |
| _comma_ | , | , |
| _apostrophe_ | \' | \' |
| _question mark_ | \? | \? |
| _exclamation mark_ | ! | ! |
