archival/austin_work/pages/resources/sample_texts.md, before:

This page collects every sample text used on Kasuto.net for the Hylian Language Institute.

## Index Page
- Bënkati kaz niatore da·ia taz langve hilana
- `SALUT to.the institute.NSING of the language.NSING hylian.ADJSING`
- Welcome to the Hylian Language Institute

## Font Page
- Fonte Hilana
- `font.NSING hylian.ADJSING`
- Hylian Font

## Introduction Page
- nioSe kaz langve hilana
- `introduce.NSING to.the language.NSING hylian.ADJSING`
- Introduction to the Hylian Language

## Alphabet Page
- Taz akta·ie Hilana
- `DEF alphabet.NSING hylian.ADJSING`
- The Hylian ALphabet

### Word Stress

- **dege** `de' ge`
- **veuarde** `ve" u ar' de`
- **hiparáduse** `hi" par a' du se`
- **faeuire** `fa e" u ir' e`
- **kasuto'sa** `ka su' to sa`

## Verb Page
- Wirtën Hilanan
- `verb.NPL hylian.ADJPL`
- Hylian Verbs

### Verbal Paradigm

- tairag `be.INF` Infinitive ending. _To be._
- tairas `be.PRES` Present tense. _(you) are._
- taires `be.PAST` Past tense. _(you) were._
- tairos `be.FUT` Future tense. _(you) will be._
- tairant `be.PRESPERF` Present perfect tense. _(you) have been._
- tairënt `be.PASTPERF` Past perfect tense. _(you) had been._
- tairont `be.FUTPERF` Future perfect tense. _(you) will have been._
- tairans `be.IMP` Imperative mood, a command. _(you) be_

### Lack of Person Marking

- bagu tairas `1S be.PRES` _I am_
- taiu tairas `2S be.PRES` _You (singular) are_
- ëru tairas `3MS be.PRES` _He is_
- nosu tairas `1PL be.PRES` _We are_
- vosu tairas `2PL be.PRES` _You (plural) are_
- iëru tairas `3MPL be.PRES` _They are_

### Multiple Verbs

Sample 1
- Bagu koemes ëk goeares az koeme.
- `1S eat.PAST and like.PAST DEF food`
- I ate and (I) liked the food.

Sample 2:
- Lintans ab jhatag hilane.
- `learn.IMP to speak.PRES hylian.N1`
- (You) Learn (how) to speak Hylian.

### Objects

Sample 1:
- Bagu diares az lërde ank ëru.
- `1S give.PAST DIR book.NSING IND 3MS`
- I gave the book to him.

Table
- ab `DIR` Direct object particle. This word does not have a literal translation into English. It is used in a sentence to indicate that the following word or phrase is the direct object of the verb.
- ank `IND` Indirect object particle. This word can be literally translated as "to" or "for." It indicates that the following word or phrase is the indirect object of the verb.

### Verbal Adjuncts

#### Shi (Progressive)
- Bagu shi lërdas `1S PROG read.PRES` _I am reading._
- Bagu shi lërdes `1S PROG read.PAST` _I was reading._
- Bagu shi lërdos `1S PROG read.FUT` _I will be reading._
- Bagu shi lërdant `1S PROG read.PRESPERF` _I have been reading._
- Bagu shi lërdënt `1S PROG read.PASTPERF` _I had been reading._
- Bagu shi lërdont `1S PROG read.FUTPERF` _I will have been reading._
#### Sho (Imperfect)
- Bagu sho lërdes. `1S IMP read.PAST` _I used to read._
#### Shai (Subjunctive)
- Bagu shai lërdas. `1S SUBJ read.PRES` _I might (may) read._
- Bagu shai lërdant. `1S SUBJ read.PASTPERF` _I might (may) have read._
#### Shoi (Conditional)
- Bagu shoi lërdas. `1S COND read.PRES` _I would read._
- Bagu shoi lërdant. `1S COND read.PASTERF` _I would have read._
#### She (Imperative)
- Taiu she lërdas ab za lërde. `2S IMP read.PRES DIR DEM.ADJSING book.NSING` _You should (ought to) read this book._
- Taiu she lërdant ab za lërde. `2S IMP read.PASTPERF DIR DEM.ADJSING book.NSING` _You should (ought to) have read this book._
#### Sha (Super-Imperative)
- Taiu sha lërdas ab za lërde. `2S SUPIMP read.PRES DIR DEM.ADJSING book.NSING` _You must read this book._
#### Shu (Conditional Ability)
- Bagu shu jhatas ab hilane at lintes ab ru. `1S CONDABIL speak.PRES dir hylian.NSING if learn.PAST 3NS.` _I could speak Hylian if I learned it._
- Bagu shu jhatant ab hilane at lintënt ab ru. `1S CONDABIL speak.PRESPERF dir hylian.NSING if learn.PASTPERF 3NS.` _I could have spoken Hylian if I had learned it._
#### Shiu (Passive)
- Taz lërde shiu lërdas. `DEM book.NSING PASS read.PRES` _The book is read._
- Taz lërde shiu lërdes. `DEM book.NSING PASS read.PAST` _The book was read._
- Taz lërde shiu lërdos. `DEM book.NSING PASS read.FUT` _The book will be read._
- Taz lërde shiu lërdant. `DEM book.NSING PASS read.PRESPERF` _The book has been read._
- Taz lërde shiu lërdënt. `DEM book.NSING PASS read.PASTPERF` _The book had been read._
- Taz lërde shiu lërdont. `DEM book.NSING PASS read.FUTPERF` _The book will have been read._
#### Shite (Reflexive)
_No example of the reflexive adjunct provided_
#### Naz (Negative)
- Bagu naz lërdes az lërde. `1S NEG read.PRES DIR book.NSING` _I did not read the book._
- Ëru naz shoi lërdas az lërde. `3S NEG COND read.PAST DIR book.NSING` _He would not read the book._

Saying "no:"
- Nani, bagu naz koemos az koeme. `no, 1S NEG eat.FUT dir food.NSING` _No, I will not eat the food._

### Using the Pro-Verb
- Bagu biankes az trofashe, lo masan äktriu des. `1S seek.PAST DIR triforce.NSING, as many.ADJPL 3IPL do.PAST` _I sought the Triforce, as many others did (as did many others)._

## Noun Page
- Sonën Hilanan
- `noun.NPL hylian.ADJPL`
- Hylian Nouns

### Singular Nouns
- lërde `book.NSING` _book_
- brinste `arm.NSING` _arm_

### Plural Nouns
- lërdën `book.NPL` _books_
- brinstën `arm.NPL` _arms_

### Gender

- lërde	`book.NSING`	_book_
- piante	`parent.NSING`	_parent_
- piántile	`parent.MASC.NSING`	_father_
- piántine	`parent.FEM.NSING`	_mother_

**Forming a Gendered Noun:**

- Neutral Word: Stem + Suffix + e = New Word
  - `dege: deg + -il + e = dëgile`
  - `dege: deg + -in + e = dëgine`

- Original Word: Definition \> New Word: Definition
  - `dege: deity (neutral) > dëgile: god (masculine)`
  - `dege: deity (neutral) > dëgine: goddess (feminine)`

## Pronoun Page
- Asonën Hilanan
- `pronoun.NPL hylian.ADJPL`
- Hylian Pronouns

### List of Personal Pronouns

**Singular**
- bagu `1S`	_I_
- ta•iu `2S`	_you_
- ëru `3MS`	_he_
- sëru `3FS`	_she_
- ru `3NS`	_it_

**Plural**
- nosu `1P`	_we_
- vosu `2P`	_you_
- iëru `3MP`	_they (masculine)_
- siëru `3FP`	_they (feminine)_
- iru `3NP`	_they (neutral)_

**The Impersonal Pronoun**
- riu `4S` _one, thou, you_

Depoto riu panktas ab kirag ru, (riu) sha tëshas ab danre. `before 4S can.PRES DIR buy.INF 3NS, (4S) SUPIMP have.PRES DIR money.NSING` _Before one can buy this, he must have enough money_

## Adjective Page
- Taktën Hilanan
- `adjective.NPL hylian.ADJPL`
- Hylian Adjectives

## Number Page
- Nïmshën Hilanan
- `number.NPL hylian.ADJPL`
- Hylian Numbers

## Phrasebook
- Arkthën Ja·inan
- `expression.NPL common.ADJPL`
- Common Expressions

## Dictionary Pages
- Taz daksunare Hilana
- `DEF dictionary.NSING hylian.ADJSING`
- The Hylian Dictionary

## Literature
- Lërdishe Hilana
- `literature.NSING hylian.ADJSING`
- Hylian Literature


## Translations

### The Like-Like's Name

- _Kanshën koemitën ëk janiën goeras masan irun goeran._
- `shield.NPL eat.person.NPL and ruler.NPL like.PRES many-things.PPL like.ADJPL `
- "Shield eaters and world leaders have many likes alike."

Commit message:

style: begin converting sample-texts
Started converting sample_texts to use Obsidian "Interlinear Glossing" plugin

archival/austin_work/pages/resources/sample_texts.md, after:

# Sample Texts

This page collects every sample text used on Kasuto.net for the Hylian Language Institute.

> [!NOTE] Conversion & Glossing Convention
> Jerin: Converting this page to use glosses, convention does not require SINGULAR to be marked. Each gloss in this page should use the example line, **gla** for a compositionally delimited transcription, **glb** for a compositional gloss, **glc** for a composed translation, and a free translation **(ft)** for the official translation. Diphthong connectors should only be used in the example line, which should only use Capital Letters when the Kasuto Hylian Font requires them.

## Index Page
```gloss
\ex bënkati kaz niatore da•ia taz langve hilana
\gla bënkat.i kaz niator.e daia taz langv.e hilan.a
\glb SALUT to.the institute.NOUN of the language.NOUN hylian.ADJ
\glc Welcome to.the insitute of the language hylian
\ft Welcome to the Hylian Language Institute
```

## Font Page
```gloss
\ex fonte hilana
\gla font.e hilan.a
\glb font.NOUN hylian.ADJ
\glc Font Hylian
\ft Hylian Font
```

## Introduction Page
```gloss
\ex nioSe kaz langve hilana
\gla niosh.e kaz langv.e hilan.a
\glb introduce.NOUN to.the language.NOUN hylian.ADJ
\glc Introduction to.the Language Hylian
\ft Introduction to the Hylian Language
```

## Alphabet Page
- Taz akta·ie Hilana
- `DEF alphabet.NSING hylian.ADJSING`
- The Hylian ALphabet

### Word Stress

- **dege** `de' ge`
- **veuarde** `ve" u ar' de`
- **hiparáduse** `hi" par a' du se`
- **faeuire** `fa e" u ir' e`
- **kasuto'sa** `ka su' to sa`

## Verb Page
- Wirtën Hilanan
- `verb.NPL hylian.ADJPL`
- Hylian Verbs

### Verbal Paradigm

- tairag `be.INF` Infinitive ending. _To be._
- tairas `be.PRES` Present tense. _(you) are._
- taires `be.PAST` Past tense. _(you) were._
- tairos `be.FUT` Future tense. _(you) will be._
- tairant `be.PRESPERF` Present perfect tense. _(you) have been._
- tairënt `be.PASTPERF` Past perfect tense. _(you) had been._
- tairont `be.FUTPERF` Future perfect tense. _(you) will have been._
- tairans `be.IMP` Imperative mood, a command. _(you) be_

### Lack of Person Marking

- bagu tairas `1S be.PRES` _I am_
- taiu tairas `2S be.PRES` _You (singular) are_
- ëru tairas `3MS be.PRES` _He is_
- nosu tairas `1PL be.PRES` _We are_
- vosu tairas `2PL be.PRES` _You (plural) are_
- iëru tairas `3MPL be.PRES` _They are_

### Multiple Verbs

Sample 1
- Bagu koemes ëk goeares az koeme.
- `1S eat.PAST and like.PAST DEF food`
- I ate and (I) liked the food.

Sample 2:
- Lintans ab jhatag hilane.
- `learn.IMP to speak.PRES hylian.N1`
- (You) Learn (how) to speak Hylian.

### Objects

Sample 1:
- Bagu diares az lërde ank ëru.
- `1S give.PAST DIR book.NSING IND 3MS`
- I gave the book to him.

Table
- ab `DIR` Direct object particle. This word does not have a literal translation into English. It is used in a sentence to indicate that the following word or phrase is the direct object of the verb.
- ank `IND` Indirect object particle. This word can be literally translated as "to" or "for." It indicates that the following word or phrase is the indirect object of the verb.

### Verbal Adjuncts

#### Shi (Progressive)
- Bagu shi lërdas `1S PROG read.PRES` _I am reading._
- Bagu shi lërdes `1S PROG read.PAST` _I was reading._
- Bagu shi lërdos `1S PROG read.FUT` _I will be reading._
- Bagu shi lërdant `1S PROG read.PRESPERF` _I have been reading._
- Bagu shi lërdënt `1S PROG read.PASTPERF` _I had been reading._
- Bagu shi lërdont `1S PROG read.FUTPERF` _I will have been reading._
#### Sho (Imperfect)
- Bagu sho lërdes. `1S IMP read.PAST` _I used to read._
#### Shai (Subjunctive)
- Bagu shai lërdas. `1S SUBJ read.PRES` _I might (may) read._
- Bagu shai lërdant. `1S SUBJ read.PASTPERF` _I might (may) have read._
#### Shoi (Conditional)
- Bagu shoi lërdas. `1S COND read.PRES` _I would read._
- Bagu shoi lërdant. `1S COND read.PASTERF` _I would have read._
#### She (Imperative)
- Taiu she lërdas ab za lërde. `2S IMP read.PRES DIR DEM.ADJSING book.NSING` _You should (ought to) read this book._
- Taiu she lërdant ab za lërde. `2S IMP read.PASTPERF DIR DEM.ADJSING book.NSING` _You should (ought to) have read this book._
#### Sha (Super-Imperative)
- Taiu sha lërdas ab za lërde. `2S SUPIMP read.PRES DIR DEM.ADJSING book.NSING` _You must read this book._
#### Shu (Conditional Ability)
- Bagu shu jhatas ab hilane at lintes ab ru. `1S CONDABIL speak.PRES dir hylian.NSING if learn.PAST 3NS.` _I could speak Hylian if I learned it._
- Bagu shu jhatant ab hilane at lintënt ab ru. `1S CONDABIL speak.PRESPERF dir hylian.NSING if learn.PASTPERF 3NS.` _I could have spoken Hylian if I had learned it._
#### Shiu (Passive)
- Taz lërde shiu lërdas. `DEM book.NSING PASS read.PRES` _The book is read._
- Taz lërde shiu lërdes. `DEM book.NSING PASS read.PAST` _The book was read._
- Taz lërde shiu lërdos. `DEM book.NSING PASS read.FUT` _The book will be read._
- Taz lërde shiu lërdant. `DEM book.NSING PASS read.PRESPERF` _The book has been read._
- Taz lërde shiu lërdënt. `DEM book.NSING PASS read.PASTPERF` _The book had been read._
- Taz lërde shiu lërdont. `DEM book.NSING PASS read.FUTPERF` _The book will have been read._
#### Shite (Reflexive)
_No example of the reflexive adjunct provided_
#### Naz (Negative)
- Bagu naz lërdes az lërde. `1S NEG read.PRES DIR book.NSING` _I did not read the book._
- Ëru naz shoi lërdas az lërde. `3S NEG COND read.PAST DIR book.NSING` _He would not read the book._

Saying "no:"
- Nani, bagu naz koemos az koeme. `no, 1S NEG eat.FUT dir food.NSING` _No, I will not eat the food._

### Using the Pro-Verb
- Bagu biankes az trofashe, lo masan äktriu des. `1S seek.PAST DIR triforce.NSING, as many.ADJPL 3IPL do.PAST` _I sought the Triforce, as many others did (as did many others)._

## Noun Page
- Sonën Hilanan
- `noun.NPL hylian.ADJPL`
- Hylian Nouns

### Singular Nouns
- lërde `book.NSING` _book_
- brinste `arm.NSING` _arm_

### Plural Nouns
- lërdën `book.NPL` _books_
- brinstën `arm.NPL` _arms_

### Gender

- lërde	`book.NSING`	_book_
- piante	`parent.NSING`	_parent_
- piántile	`parent.MASC.NSING`	_father_
- piántine	`parent.FEM.NSING`	_mother_

**Forming a Gendered Noun:**

- Neutral Word: Stem + Suffix + e = New Word
  - `dege: deg + -il + e = dëgile`
  - `dege: deg + -in + e = dëgine`

- Original Word: Definition \> New Word: Definition
  - `dege: deity (neutral) > dëgile: god (masculine)`
  - `dege: deity (neutral) > dëgine: goddess (feminine)`

## Pronoun Page
- Asonën Hilanan
- `pronoun.NPL hylian.ADJPL`
- Hylian Pronouns

### List of Personal Pronouns

**Singular**
- bagu `1S`	_I_
- ta•iu `2S`	_you_
- ëru `3MS`	_he_
- sëru `3FS`	_she_
- ru `3NS`	_it_

**Plural**
- nosu `1P`	_we_
- vosu `2P`	_you_
- iëru `3MP`	_they (masculine)_
- siëru `3FP`	_they (feminine)_
- iru `3NP`	_they (neutral)_

**The Impersonal Pronoun**
- riu `4S` _one, thou, you_

Depoto riu panktas ab kirag ru, (riu) sha tëshas ab danre. `before 4S can.PRES DIR buy.INF 3NS, (4S) SUPIMP have.PRES DIR money.NSING` _Before one can buy this, he must have enough money_

## Adjective Page
- Taktën Hilanan
- `adjective.NPL hylian.ADJPL`
- Hylian Adjectives

## Number Page
- Nïmshën Hilanan
- `number.NPL hylian.ADJPL`
- Hylian Numbers

## Phrasebook
- Arkthën Ja·inan
- `expression.NPL common.ADJPL`
- Common Expressions

## Dictionary Pages
- Taz daksunare Hilana
- `DEF dictionary.NSING hylian.ADJSING`
- The Hylian Dictionary

## Literature
- Lërdishe Hilana
- `literature.NSING hylian.ADJSING`
- Hylian Literature


## Translations

### The Like-Like's Name

- _Kanshën koemitën ëk janiën goeras masan irun goeran._
- `shield.NPL eat.person.NPL and ruler.NPL like.PRES many-things.PPL like.ADJPL `
- "Shield eaters and world leaders have many likes alike."
